The Project Gutenberg eBook of Poirot Investigates
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Poirot Investigates

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: January 28, 2020 [eBook #61262]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POIROT INVESTIGATES ***

  POIROT INVESTIGATES




  BY THE SAME AUTHOR

  THE MYSTERIOUS AFFAIR AT STYLES

  THE SECRET ADVERSARY

  THE MURDER ON THE LINKS

  THE BODLEY HEAD




  POIROT INVESTIGATES

  BY AGATHA CHRISTIE




  LONDON

  JOHN LANE THE BODLEY HEAD LIMITED




  First published in Great Britain by
  John Lane Company, The Bodley Head Limited, 1924

  Copyright © 1924 Agatha Christie Limited




  CONTENTS


  I The Adventure of “The Western Star”

  II The Tragedy at Marsdon Manor

  III The Adventure of the Cheap Flat

  IV The Mystery of Hunter’s Lodge

  V The Million Dollar Bond Robbery

  VI The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb

  VII Jewel Robbery at the _Grand Metropolitan_

  VIII The Kidnapped Prime Minister

  IX The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim

  X The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman

  XI The Case of the Missing Will




  POIROT INVESTIGATES




  POIROT INVESTIGATES


  I


  The Adventure of “The Western Star”

I was standing at the window of Poirot’s rooms looking out idly on
the street below.

“That’s queer,” I ejaculated suddenly beneath my breath.

“What is, _mon ami_?” asked Poirot placidly, from the depths of
his comfortable chair.

“Deduce, Poirot, from the following facts! Here is a young lady,
richly dressed—fashionable hat, magnificent furs. She is coming
along slowly, looking up at the houses as she goes. Unknown to her,
she is being shadowed by three men and a middle-aged woman. They
have just been joined by an errand boy who points after the girl,
gesticulating as he does so. What drama is this being played? Is
the girl a crook, and are the shadowers detectives preparing to
arrest her? Or are _they_ the scoundrels, and are they plotting to
attack an innocent victim? What does the great detective say?”

“The great detective, _mon ami_, chooses, as ever, the simplest
course. He rises to see for himself.” And my friend joined me at
the window.

In a minute he gave vent to an amused chuckle.

“As usual, your facts are tinged with your incurable romanticism.
That is Miss Mary Marvell, the film star. She is being followed by
a bevy of admirers who have recognized her. And, _en passant_, my
dear Hastings, she is quite aware of the fact!”

I laughed.

“So all is explained! But you get no marks for that, Poirot. It
was a mere matter of recognition.”

“_En vérité!_ And how many times have you seen Mary Marvell on the
screen, _mon cher_?”

I thought.

“About a dozen times perhaps.”

“And I—once! Yet _I_ recognize her, and _you_ do not.”

“She looks so different,” I replied rather feebly.

“Ah! _Sacré_!” cried Poirot. “Is it that you expect her to promenade
herself in the streets of London in a cowboy hat, or with bare
feet, and a bunch of curls, as an Irish colleen? Always with you
it is the non-essentials! Remember the case of the dancer, Valerie
Saintclair.”

I shrugged my shoulders, slightly annoyed.

“But console yourself, _mon ami_,” said Poirot, calming down. “All
cannot be as Hercule Poirot! I know it well.”

“You really have the best opinion of yourself of anyone I ever
knew!” I cried, divided between amusement and annoyance.

“What will you? When one is unique, one knows it! And others share
that opinion—even, if I mistake not, Miss Mary Marvell.”

“What?”

“Without doubt. She is coming here.”

“How do you make that out?”

“Very simply. This street, it is not aristocratic, _mon ami_! In
it there is no fashionable doctor, no fashionable dentist—still
less is there a fashionable milliner! But there _is_ a fashionable
detective. _Oui_, my friend, it is true—I am become the mode, the
_dernier cri_! One says to another: ‘_Comment?_ You have lost your
gold pencil-case? You must go to the little Belgian. He is too
marvellous! Every one goes! _Courez!’_ And they arrive! In flocks,
_mon ami_! With problems of the most foolish!” A bell rang below.
“What did I tell you? That is Miss Marvell.”

As usual, Poirot was right. After a short interval, the American
film star was ushered in, and we rose to our feet.

Mary Marvell was undoubtedly one of the most popular actresses on
the screen. She had only lately arrived in England in company with
her husband, Gregory B. Rolf, also a film actor. Their marriage
had taken place about a year ago in the States and this was their
first visit to England. They had been given a great reception.
Every one was prepared to go mad over Mary Marvell, her wonderful
clothes, her furs, her jewels, above all one jewel, the great
diamond which had been nicknamed, to match its owner, “the Western
Star.” Much, true and untrue, had been written about this famous
stone which was reported to be insured for the enormous sum of
fifty thousand pounds.

All these details passed rapidly through my mind as I joined with
Poirot in greeting our fair client.

Miss Marvell was small and slender, very fair and girlish-looking,
with the wide innocent blue eyes of a child.

Poirot drew forward a chair for her, and she commenced talking at
once.

“You will probably think me very foolish, Monsieur Poirot, but Lord
Cronshaw was telling me last night how wonderfully you cleared up
the mystery of his nephew’s death, and I felt that I just must have
your advice. I dare say it’s only a silly hoax—Gregory says so—but
it’s just worrying me to death.”

She paused for breath. Poirot beamed encouragement.

“Proceed, Madame. You comprehend, I am still in the dark.”

“It’s these letters.” Miss Marvell unclasped her handbag, and drew
out three envelopes which she handed to Poirot.

The latter scrutinized them closely.

“Cheap paper—the name and address carefully printed. Let us see
the inside.” He drew out the enclosure.

I had joined him, and was leaning over his shoulder. The writing
consisted of a single sentence, carefully printed like the envelope.
It ran as follows:

“The great diamond which is the left eye of the god must return
whence it came.”

The second letter was couched in precisely the same terms, but the
third was more explicit:

“You have been warned. You have not obeyed. Now the diamond will
be taken from you. At the full of the moon, the two diamonds which
are the left and right eye of the god shall return. So it is
written.”

“The first letter I treated as a joke,” explained Miss Marvell.
“When I got the second, I began to wonder. The third one came
yesterday, and it seemed to me that, after all, the matter might
be more serious than I had imagined.”

“I see they did not come by post, these letters.”

“No; they were left by hand—by a _Chinaman._ That is what frightens
me.”

“Why?”

“Because it was from a Chink in San Francisco that Gregory bought
the stone three years ago.”

“I see, madame, that you believe the diamond referred to to be——”

“‘The Western Star,’” finished Miss Marvell. “That’s so. At the
time, Gregory remembers that there was some story attached to the
stone, but the Chink wasn’t handing out any information. Gregory
says he seemed just scared to death, and in a mortal hurry to get
rid of the thing. He only asked about a tenth of its value. It was
Greg’s wedding present to me.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“The story seems of an almost unbelievable romanticism. And yet—who
knows? I pray of you, Hastings, hand me my little almanac.”

I complied.

“_Voyons!_” said Poirot, turning the leaves.

“When is the date of the full moon? Ah, Friday next. That is in
three days’ time. _Eh bien_, madame, you seek my advice—I give it
to you. This _belle histoire_ may be a hoax—but it may not!
Therefore I counsel you to place the diamond in my keeping until
after Friday next. Then we can take what steps we please.”

A slight cloud passed over the actress’s face, and she replied
constrainedly:

“I’m afraid that’s impossible.”

“You have it with you—_hein_?” Poirot was watching her narrowly.

The girl hesitated a moment, then slipped her hand into the bosom
of her gown, drawing out a long thin chain. She leaned forward,
unclosing her hand. In the palm, a stone of white fire, exquisitely
set in platinum, lay and winked at us solemnly.

Poirot drew in his breath with a long hiss.

“_Épatant!_” he murmured. “You permit, madame?” He took the jewel
in his own hand and scrutinized it keenly, then restored it to her
with a little bow. “A magnificent stone—without a flaw. Ah, _cent
tonnerres!_ and you carry it about with you, _comme ça_!”

“No, no, I’m very careful really, Monsieur Poirot. As a rule it’s
locked up in my jewel-case, and left in the hotel safe deposit.
We’re staying at the _Magnificent_, you know. I just brought it
along to-day for you to see.”

“And you will leave it with me, _n’est-ce pas_? You will be advised
by Papa Poirot?”

“Well, you see, it’s this way, Monsieur Poirot. On Friday we’re
going down to Yardly Chase to spend a few days with Lord and Lady
Yardly.”

Her words awoke a vague echo of remembrance in my mind. Some
gossip—what was it now? A few years ago Lord and Lady Yardly had
paid a visit to the States, rumour had it that his lordship had
rather gone the pace out there with the assistance of some lady
friends—but surely there was something more, some gossip which
coupled Lady Yardly’s name with that of a “movie” star in
California—why! it came to me in a flash—of course it was none
other than Gregory B. Rolf.

“I’ll let you into a little secret, Monsieur Poirot,” Miss Marvell
was continuing. “We’ve got a deal on with Lord Yardly. There’s some
chance of our arranging to film a play down there in his ancestral
pile.”

“At Yardly Chase?” I cried, interested. “Why, it’s one of the show
places of England.”

Miss Marvell nodded.

“I guess it’s the real old feudal stuff all right. But he wants a
pretty stiff price, and of course I don’t know yet whether the deal
will go through, but Greg and I always like to combine business
with pleasure.”

“But—I demand pardon if I am dense, madame—surely it is possible
to visit Yardly Chase without taking the diamond with you?”

A shrewd, hard look came into Miss Marvell’s eyes which belied
their childlike appearance. She looked suddenly a good deal older.

“I want to wear it down there.”

“Surely” I said suddenly, “there are some very famous jewels in
the Yardly collection, a large diamond amongst them?”

“That’s so,” said Miss Marvell briefly.

I heard Poirot murmur beneath his breath: “Ah, _c’est comme ça_!”
Then he said aloud, with his usual uncanny luck in hitting the
bull’s-eye (he dignifies it by the name of psychology): “Then you
are without doubt already acquainted with Lady Yardly, or perhaps
your husband is?”

“Gregory knew her when she was out West three years ago,” said Miss
Marvell. She hesitated a moment, and then added abruptly: “Do
either of you ever see _Society Gossip_?”

We both pleaded guilty rather shamefacedly.

“I ask because in this week’s number there is an article on famous
jewels, and it’s really very curious——” She broke off.

I rose, went to the table at the other side of the room and returned
with the paper in question in my hand. She took it from me, found
the article, and began to read aloud:

“. . . Amongst other famous stones may be included the Star of the
East, a diamond in the possession of the Yardly family. An ancestor
of the present Lord Yardly brought it back with him from China,
and a romantic story is said to attach to it. According to this,
the stone was once the right eye of a temple god. Another diamond,
exactly similar in form and size, formed the left eye, and the
story goes that this jewel, too, would in course of time be stolen.
‘One eye shall go West, the other East, till they shall meet once
more. Then, in triumph shall they return to the god.’ It is a
curious coincidence that there is at the present time a stone
corresponding closely in description with this one, and known as
‘the Star of the West,’ or ‘the Western Star.’ It is the property
of the celebrated film actress, Miss Mary Marvell. A comparison of
the two stones would be interesting.”

She stopped.

“_Épatant!_” murmured Poirot. “Without doubt a romance of the first
water.” He turned to Mary Marvell. “And you are not afraid, madame?
You have no superstitious terrors? You do not fear to introduce
these two Siamese twins to each other lest a Chinaman should appear
and, hey presto! whisk them both back to China?”

His tone was mocking, but I fancied that an undercurrent of
seriousness lay beneath it.

“I don’t believe that Lady Yardly’s diamond is anything like as
good a stone as mine,” said Miss Marvell. “Anyway, I’m going to
see.”

What more Poirot would have said I do not know, for at that moment
the door flew open, and a splendid-looking man strode into the
room. From his crisply curling black head, to the tips of his
patent-leather boots, he was a hero fit for romance.

“I said I’d call round for you, Mary,” said Gregory Rolf, “and here
I am. Well, what does Monsieur Poirot say to our little problem?
Just one big hoax, same as I do?”

Poirot smiled up at the big actor. They made a ridiculous contrast.

“Hoax or no hoax, Mr. Rolf,” he said dryly, “I have advised Madame
your wife not to take the jewel with her to Yardly Chase on Friday.”

“I’m with you there, sir. I’ve already said so to Mary. But there!
She’s a woman through and through, and I guess she can’t bear to
think of another woman outshining her in the jewel line.”

“What nonsense, Gregory!” said Mary Marvell sharply. But she
flushed angrily.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Madame, I have advised. I can do no more. _C’est fini_.”

He bowed them both to the door.

“Ah! _la la_,” he observed, returning. “_Histoire de femmes!_ The
good husband, he hit the nail on the head—_tout de même_, he was
not tactful! Assuredly not.”

I imparted to him my vague remembrances, and he nodded vigorously.

“So I thought. All the same, there is something curious underneath
all this. With your permission, _mon ami_, I will take the air.
Await my return, I beg of you. I shall not be long.”

I was half asleep in my chair when the landlady tapped on the door,
and put her head in.

“It’s another lady to see Mr. Poirot, sir. I’ve told her he was
out, but she says as how she’ll wait, seeing as she’s come up from
the country.”

“Oh, show her in here, Mrs. Murchison. Perhaps I can do something
for her.”

In another moment the lady had been ushered in. My heart gave a
leap as I recognized her. Lady Yardly’s portrait had figured too
often in the Society papers to allow her to remain unknown.

“Do sit down, Lady Yardly,” I said, drawing forward a chair. “My
friend Poirot is out, but I know for a fact that he’ll be back very
shortly.”

She thanked me and sat down. A very different type, this, from Miss
Mary Marvell. Tall, dark, with flashing eyes, and a pale proud
face—yet something wistful in the curves of the mouth.

I felt a desire to rise to the occasion. Why not? In Poirot’s
presence I have frequently felt a difficulty—I do not appear at my
best. And yet there is no doubt that I, too, possess the deductive
sense in a marked degree. I leant forward on a sudden impulse.

“Lady Yardly,” I said, “I know why you have come here. You have
received blackmailing letters about the diamond.”

There was no doubt as to my bolt having shot home. She stared at
me open-mouthed, all colour banished from her cheeks.

“You know?” she gasped. “How?”

I smiled.

“By a perfectly logical process. If Miss Marvell has had warning
letters——”

“Miss Marvell? She has been here?”

“She has just left. As I was saying, if she, as the holder of one
of the twin diamonds, has received a mysterious series of warnings,
you, as the holder of the other stone, must necessarily have done
the same. You see how simple it is? I am right, then, you have
received these strange communications also?”

For a moment she hesitated, as though in doubt whether to trust me
or not, then she bowed her head in assent with a little smile.

“That is so,” she acknowledged.

“Were yours, too, left by hand—by a Chinaman?”

“No, they came by post; but, tell me, has Miss Marvell undergone
the same experience, then?”

I recounted to her the events of the morning. She listened
attentively.

“It all fits in. My letters are the duplicates of hers. It is true
that they came by post, but there is a curious perfume impregnating
them—something in the nature of joss-stick—that at once suggested
the East to me. What does it all mean?”

I shook my head.

“That is what we must find out. You have the letters with you? We
might learn something from the postmarks.”

“Unfortunately I destroyed them. You understand, at the time I
regarded it as some foolish joke. Can it be true that some Chinese
gang are really trying to recover the diamonds? It seems too
incredible.”

We went over the facts again and again, but could get no further
towards the elucidation of the mystery. At last Lady Yardly rose.

“I really don’t think I need wait for Monsieur Poirot. You can tell
him all this, can’t you? Thank you so much, Mr.——”

She hesitated, her hand outstretched.

“Captain Hastings.”

“Of course! How stupid of me. You’re a friend of the Cavendishes,
aren’t you? It was Mary Cavendish who sent me to Monsieur Poirot.”

When my friend returned, I enjoyed telling him the tale of what
had occurred during his absence. He cross-questioned me rather
sharply over the details of our conversation and I could read
between the lines that he was not best pleased to have been absent.
I also fancied that the dear old fellow was just the least inclined
to be jealous. It had become rather a pose with him to consistently
belittle my abilities, and I think he was chagrined at finding no
loophole for criticism. I was secretly rather pleased with myself,
though I tried to conceal the fact for fear of irritating him. In
spite of his idiosyncrasies, I was deeply attached to my quaint
little friend.

“_Bien!_” he said at length, with a curious look on his face. “The
plot develops. Pass me, I pray you, that ‘Peerage’ on the top shelf
there.” He turned the leaves. “Ah, here we are! ‘Yardly . . . 10th
viscount, served South African War’ . . . _tout ça n’a pas
d’importance_ . . . ‘mar. 1907 Hon. Maude Stopperton, fourth
daughter of 3rd Baron Cotteril’ . . . um, um, um, . . . ‘has iss.
two daughters, born 1908, 1910. . . . Clubs . . . residences.’ . . .
_Voilà_, that does not tell us much. But to-morrow morning we see
this _milord_!”

“What?”

“Yes. I telegraphed to him.”

“I thought you had washed your hands of the case?”

“I am not acting for Miss Marvell since she refuses to be guided
by my advice. What I do now is for my own satisfaction—the
satisfaction of Hercule Poirot! Decidedly, I must have a finger in
this pie.”

“And you calmly wire Lord Yardly to dash up to town just to suit
your convenience. He won’t be pleased.”

“_Au contraire_, if I preserve for him his family diamond, he ought
to be very grateful.”

“Then you really think there is a chance of it being stolen?” I
asked eagerly.

“Almost a certainty,” replied Poirot placidly. “Everything points
that way.”

“But how——”

Poirot stopped my eager questions with an airy gesture of the hand.

“Not now, I pray you. Let us not confuse the mind. And observe that
‘Peerage’—how you have replaced him! See you not that the tallest
books go in the top shelf, the next tallest in the row beneath,
and so on. Thus we have order, _method_, which, as I have often
told you, Hastings——”

“Exactly,” I said hastily, and put the offending volume in its
proper place.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


Lord Yardly turned out to be a cheery, loud-voiced sportsman with
a rather red face, but with a good-humoured bonhomie about him that
was distinctly attractive and made up for any lack of mentality.

“Extraordinary business this, Monsieur Poirot. Can’t make head or
tail of it. Seems my wife’s been getting odd kind of letters, and
that this Miss Marvell’s had ’em too. What does it all mean?”

Poirot handed him the copy of _Society Gossip_.

“First, _milord_, I would ask you if these facts are substantially
correct?”

The peer took it. His face darkened with anger as he read.

“Damned nonsense!” he spluttered. “There’s never been any romantic
story attaching to the diamond. It came from India originally, I
believe. I never heard of all this Chinese god stuff.”

“Still, the stone _is_ known as ‘The Star of the East.’”

“Well, what if it is?” he demanded wrathfully.

Poirot smiled a little, but made no direct reply. “What I would
ask you to do, _milord_, is to place yourself in my hands. If you
do so unreservedly, I have great hopes of averting the catastrophe.”

“Then you think there’s actually something in these wild-cat
tales?”

“Will you do as I ask you?”

“Of course I will, but——”

“_Bien!_ Then permit that I ask you a few questions. This affair
of Yardly Chase, is it, as you say, all fixed up between you and
Mr. Rolf?”

“Oh, he told you about it, did he? No, there’s nothing settled.”
He hesitated, the brick-red colour of his face deepening. “Might
as well get the thing straight. I’ve made rather an ass of myself
in many ways, Monsieur Poirot—and I’m head over ears in debt—but
I want to pull up. I’m fond of the kids, and I want to straighten
things up, and be able to live on at the old place. Gregory Rolf
is offering me big money—enough to set me on my feet again. I don’t
want to do it—I hate the thought of all that crowd play-acting
round the Chase—but I may have to, unless——” He broke off.

Poirot eyed him keenly. “You have, then, another string to your
bow? Permit that I make a guess? It is to sell the Star of the
East?”

Lord Yardly nodded. “That’s it. It’s been in the family for some
generations, but it’s not entailed. Still, it’s not the easiest
thing in the world to find a purchaser. Hoffberg, the Hatton Garden
man, is on the look-out for a likely customer, but he’ll have to
find one soon, or it’s a washout.”

“One more question, _permettez_—Lady Yardly, which plan does she
approve?”

“Oh, she’s bitterly opposed to my selling the jewel. You know what
women are. She’s all for this film stunt.”

“I comprehend,” said Poirot. He remained a moment or so in thought,
then rose briskly to his feet. “You return to Yardly Chase at once?
_Bien!_ Say no word to anyone—to _anyone_ mind—but expect us there
this evening. We will arrive shortly after five.”

“All right, but I don’t see——”

“_Ça n’a pas d’importance_,” said Poirot kindly. “You will that I
preserve for you your diamond, _n’est-ce pas_?”

“Yes, but——”

“Then do as I say.”

A sadly bewildered nobleman left the room.

  •   •   •   •   •   •   •

It was half-past five when we arrived at Yardly Chase, and followed
the dignified butler to the old panelled hall with its fire of
blazing logs. A pretty picture met our eyes: Lady Yardly and her
two children, the mother’s proud dark head bent down over the two
fair ones. Lord Yardly stood near, smiling down on them.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings,” announced the butler.

Lady Yardly looked up with a start, her husband came forward
uncertainly, his eyes seeking instruction from Poirot. The little
man was equal to the occasion.

“All my excuses! It is that I investigate still this affair of Miss
Marvell’s. She comes to you on Friday, does she not? I make a
little tour first to make sure that all is secure. Also I wanted
to ask of Lady Yardly if she recollected at all the postmarks on
the letters she received?”

Lady Yardly shook her head regretfully. “I’m afraid I don’t. It is
stupid of me. But, you see, I never dreamt of taking them
seriously.”

“You’ll stay the night?” said Lord Yardly.

“Oh, _milord_, I fear to incommode you. We have left our bags at
the inn.”

“That’s all right.” Lord Yardly had his cue. “We’ll send down for
them. No, no—no trouble, I assure you.”

Poirot permitted himself to be persuaded, and sitting down by Lady
Yardly, began to make friends with the children. In a short time
they were all romping together, and had dragged me into the game.

“_Vous êtes bonne mère_,” said Poirot, with a gallant little bow,
as the children were removed reluctantly by a stern nurse.

Lady Yardly smoothed her ruffled hair.

“I adore them,” she said with a little catch in her voice.

“And they you—with reason!” Poirot bowed again.

A dressing-gong sounded, and we rose to go up to our rooms. At that
moment the butler entered with a telegram on a salver which he
handed to Lord Yardly. The latter tore it open with a brief word
of apology. As he read it he stiffened visibly.

With an ejaculation, he handed it to his wife. Then he glanced at
my friend.

“Just a minute, Monsieur Poirot. I feel you ought to know about
this. It’s from Hoffberg. He thinks he’s found a customer for the
diamond—an American, sailing for the States to-morrow. They’re
sending down a chap to-night to vet the stone. By Jove, though, if
this goes through——” Words failed him.

Lady Yardly had turned away. She still held the telegram in her
hand.

“I wish you wouldn’t sell it, George,” she said, in a low voice.
“It’s been in the family so long.” She waited, as though for a
reply, but when none came her face hardened. She shrugged her
shoulders. “I must go and dress. I suppose I had better display
‘the goods.’” She turned to Poirot with a slight grimace. “It’s
one of the most hideous necklaces that was ever designed! George
has always promised to have the stones reset for me, but it’s never
been done.” She left the room.

Half an hour later, we three were assembled in the great drawing-room
awaiting the lady. It was already a few minutes past the dinner
hour.

Suddenly there was a low rustle, and Lady Yardly appeared framed
in the doorway, a radiant figure in a long white shimmering dress.
Round the column of her neck was a rivulet of fire. She stood there
with one hand just touching the necklace.

“Behold the sacrifice,” she said gaily. Her ill-humour seemed to
have vanished. “Wait while I turn the big light on and you shall
feast your eyes on the ugliest necklace in England.”

The switches were just outside the door. As she stretched out her
hand to them, the incredible thing happened. Suddenly without any
warning, every light was extinguished, the door banged, and from
the other side of it came a long-drawn piercing woman’s scream.

“My God!” cried Lord Yardly. “That was Maude’s voice! What has
happened?”

We rushed blindly for the door, cannoning into each other in the
darkness. It was some minutes before we could find it. What a sight
met our eyes! Lady Yardly lay senseless on the marble floor, a
crimson mark on her white throat where the necklace had been
wrenched from her neck.

As we bent over her, uncertain for the moment whether she were dead
or alive, her eyelids opened.

“The Chinaman,” she whispered painfully. “The Chinaman—the side
door.”

Lord Yardly sprang up with an oath. I accompanied him, my heart
beating wildly. The Chinaman again! The side door in question was
a small one in the angle of the wall, not more than a dozen yards
from the scene of the tragedy. As we reached it, I gave a cry.
There, just short of the threshold, lay the glittering necklace,
evidently dropped by the thief in the panic of his flight. I
swooped joyously down on it. Then I uttered another cry which Lord
Yardly echoed. For in the middle of the necklace was a great gap.
The Star of the East was missing!

“That settles it,” I breathed. “These were no ordinary thieves.
This one stone was all they wanted.”

“But how did the fellow get in?”

“Through this door.”

“But it’s always locked.”

I shook my head. “It’s not locked now. See.” I pulled it open as
I spoke.

As I did so something fluttered to the ground. I picked it up. It
was a piece of silk, and the embroidery was unmistakable. It had
been torn from a Chinaman’s robe.

“In his haste it caught in the door,” I explained. “Come, hurry.
He cannot have gone far as yet.”

But in vain we hunted and searched. In the pitch darkness of the
night, the thief had found it easy to make his getaway. We returned
reluctantly, and Lord Yardly sent off one of the footmen post-haste
to fetch the police.

Lady Yardly, aptly ministered to by Poirot, who is as good as a
woman in these matters, was sufficiently recovered to be able to
tell her story.

“I was just going to turn on the other light,” she said, “when a
man sprang on me from behind. He tore my necklace from my neck with
such force that I fell headlong to the floor. As I fell I saw him
disappearing through the side door. Then I realized by the pig-tail
and the embroidered robe that he was a Chinaman.” She stopped with
a shudder.

The butler reappeared. He spoke in a low voice to Lord Yardly.

“A gentleman from Mr. Hoffberg’s, m’lord. He says you expect him.”

“Good heavens!” cried the distracted nobleman. “I must see him, I
suppose. No, not here, Mullings, in the library.”

I drew Poirot aside.

“Look here, my dear fellow, hadn’t we better get back to London?”

“You think so, Hastings? Why?”

“Well”—I coughed delicately—“things haven’t gone very well, have
they? I mean, you tell Lord Yardly to place himself in your hands
and all will be well—and then the diamond vanishes from under your
very nose!”

“True,” said Poirot, rather crestfallen. “It was not one of my most
striking triumphs.”

This way of describing events almost caused me to smile, but I
stuck to my guns.

“So, having—pardon the expression—rather made a mess of things,
don’t you think it would be more graceful to leave immediately?”

“And the dinner, the without doubt excellent dinner, that the
_chef_ of Lord Yardly has prepared?”

“Oh, what’s dinner!” I said impatiently.

Poirot held up his hands in horror.

“_Mon Dieu!_ It is that in this country you treat the affairs
gastronomic with a criminal indifference.”

“There’s another reason why we should get back to London as soon
as possible,” I continued.

“What is that, my friend?”

“The other diamond,” I said, lowering my voice. “Miss Marvell’s.”

“_Eh bien_, what of it?”

“Don’t you see?” His unusual obtuseness annoyed me. What had
happened to his usually keen wits? “They’ve got one, now they’ll
go for the other.”

“_Tiens!_” cried Poirot, stepping back a pace and regarding me with
admiration. “But your brain marches to a marvel, my friend! Figure
to yourself that for the moment I had not thought of that! But
there is plenty of time. The full of the moon, it is not until
Friday.”

I shook my head dubiously. The full of the moon theory left me
entirely cold. I had my way with Poirot, however, and we departed
immediately, leaving behind us a note of explanation and apology
for Lord Yardly.

My idea was to go at once to the _Magnificent_, and relate to Miss
Marvell what had occurred, but Poirot vetoed the plan, and insisted
that the morning would be time enough. I gave in rather grudgingly.

In the morning Poirot seemed strangely disinclined to stir out. I
began to suspect that, having made a mistake to start with, he was
singularly loath to proceed with the case. In answer to my
persuasions, he pointed out, with admirable common sense, that as
the details of the affair at Yardly Chase were already in the
morning papers the Rolfs would know quite as much as we could tell
them. I gave way unwillingly.

Events proved my forebodings to be justified. About two o’clock,
the telephone rang. Poirot answered it. He listened for some
moments, then with a brief “_Bien, j’y serai_” he rang off, and
turned to me.

“What do you think, _mon ami_?” He looked half ashamed, half
excited. “The diamond of Miss Marvell, it has been stolen.”

“What?” I cried, springing up. “And what about the ‘full of the
moon’ now?” Poirot hung his head. “When did this happen?”

“This morning, I understand.”

I shook my head sadly. “If only you had listened to me. You see I
was right.”

“It appears so, _mon ami_,” said Poirot cautiously. “Appearances
are deceptive, they say, but it certainly appears so.”

As we hurried in a taxi to the _Magnificent_, I puzzled out the
true inwardness of the scheme.

“That ‘full of the moon’ idea was clever. The whole point of it
was to get us to concentrate on the Friday, and so be off our guard
beforehand. It is a pity you did not realize that.”

“_Ma foi!_” said Poirot airily, his nonchalance quite restored
after its brief eclipse. “One cannot think of everything!”

I felt sorry for him. He did so hate failure of any kind.

“Cheer up,” I said consolingly. “Better luck next time.”

At the _Magnificent_, we were ushered at once into the manager’s
office. Gregory Rolf was there with two men from Scotland Yard. A
pale-faced clerk sat opposite them.

Rolf nodded to us as we entered.

“We’re getting to the bottom of it,” he said. “But it’s almost
unbelievable. How the guy had the nerve I can’t think.”

A very few minutes sufficed to give us the facts. Mr. Rolf had gone
out of the hotel at 11.15. At 11.30, a gentleman, so like him in
appearance as to pass muster, entered the hotel and demanded the
jewel-case from the safe deposit. He duly signed the receipt,
remarking carelessly as he did so: “Looks a bit different from my
ordinary one, but I hurt my hand getting out of the taxi.” The
clerk merely smiled and remarked that he saw very little difference.
Rolf laughed and said: “Well, don’t run me in as a crook this time,
anyway. I’ve been getting threatening letters from a Chinaman, and
the worst of it is I look rather like a Chink myself—it’s something
about the eyes.”

“I looked at him,” said the clerk who was telling us this, “and I
saw at once what he meant. The eyes slanted up at the corners like
an Oriental’s. I’d never noticed it before.”

“Darn it all, man,” roared Gregory Rolf, leaning forward, “do you
notice it now?”

The man looked up at him and started.

“No, sir,” he said. “I can’t say I do.” And indeed there was
nothing even remotely Oriental about the frank brown eyes that
looked into ours.

The Scotland Yard man grunted. “Bold customer. Thought the eyes
might be noticed, and took the bull by the horns to disarm
suspicion. He must have watched you out of the hotel, sir, and
nipped in as soon as you were well away.”

“What about the jewel-case?” I asked.

“It was found in a corridor of the hotel. Only one thing had been
taken—‘the Western Star.’”

We stared at each other—the whole thing was so bizarre, so unreal.

Poirot hopped briskly to his feet. “I have not been of much use,
I fear,” he said regretfully. “Is it permitted to see Madame?”

“I guess she’s prostrated with the shock,” explained Rolf.

“Then perhaps I might have a few words alone with you, monsieur?”

“Certainly.”

In about five minutes Poirot reappeared.

“Now, my friend,” he said gaily. “To a post office. I have to send
a telegram.”

“Who to?”

“Lord Yardly.” He discounted further inquiries by slipping his arm
through mine. “Come, come, _mon ami_. I know all that you feel
about this miserable business. I have not distinguished myself!
You, in my place, might have distinguished yourself! _Bien!_ All
is admitted. Let us forget it and have lunch.”

It was about four o’clock when we entered Poirot’s rooms. A figure
rose from a chair by the window. It was Lord Yardly. He looked
haggard and distraught.

“I got your wire and came up at once. Look here, I’ve been round
to Hoffberg, and they know nothing about that man of theirs last
night, or the wire either. Do you think that——”

Poirot held up his hand.

“My excuses! I sent that wire, and hired the gentleman in question.”

“_You_—but why? What?” The nobleman spluttered impotently.

“My little idea was to bring things to a head,” explained Poirot
placidly.

“Bring things to a head! Oh, my God!” cried Lord Yardly.

“And the ruse succeeded,” said Poirot cheerfully. “Therefore,
_milord_, I have much pleasure in returning you—this!” With a
dramatic gesture he produced a glittering object. It was a great
diamond.

“The Star of the East,” gasped Lord Yardly. “But I don’t
understand——”

“No?” said Poirot. “It makes no matter. Believe me, it was necessary
for the diamond to be stolen. I promised you that it should be
preserved to you, and I have kept my word. You must permit me to
keep my little secret. Convey, I beg of you, the assurances of my
deepest respect to Lady Yardly, and tell her how pleased I am to
be able to restore her jewel to her. What _beau temps_, is it not?
Good day, _milord_.”

And smiling and talking, the amazing little man conducted the
bewildered nobleman to the door. He returned gently rubbing his
hands.

“Poirot,” I said. “Am I quite demented?”

“No, _mon ami_, but you are, as always, in a mental fog.”

“How did you get the diamond.”

“From Mr. Rolf.”

“Rolf?”

“_Mais oui!_ The warning letters, the Chinaman, the article in
_Society Gossip_, all sprang from the ingenious brain of Mr. Rolf!
The two diamonds, supposed to be so miraculously alike—bah! they
did not exist. There was only _one_ diamond, my friend! Originally
in the Yardly collection, for three years it has been in the
possession of Mr. Rolf. He stole it this morning with the assistance
of a touch of grease paint at the corner of each eye! Ah, I must
see him on the film, he is indeed an artist, _celui-là_!

“But why should he steal his own diamond?” I asked, puzzled.

“For many reasons. To begin with, Lady Yardly was getting restive.”

“Lady Yardly?”

“You comprehend she was left much alone in California. Her husband
was amusing himself elsewhere. Mr. Rolf was handsome, he had an
air about him of romance. But _au fond_, he is very business-like,
_ce monsieur_! He made love to Lady Yardly, and then he blackmailed
her. I taxed the lady with the truth the other night, and she
admitted it. She swore that she had only been indiscreet, and I
believe her. But, undoubtedly, Rolf had letters of hers that could
be twisted to bear a different interpretation. Terrified by the
threat of a divorce, and the prospect of being separated from her
children, she agreed to all he wished. She had no money of her own,
and she was forced to permit him to substitute a paste replica for
the real stone. The coincidence of the date of the appearance of
‘the Western Star’ struck me at once. All goes well. Lord Yardly
prepares to range himself—to settle down. And then comes the menace
of the possible sale of the diamond. The substitution will be
discovered. Without doubt she writes off frantically to Gregory
Rolf who has just arrived in England. He soothes her by promising
to arrange all—and prepares for a double robbery. In this way he
will quiet the lady, who might conceivably tell all to her husband,
an affair which would not suit our blackmailer at all, he will have
£50,000 insurance money (aha, you had forgotten that!), and he will
still have the diamond! At this point I put my finger in the pie.
The arrival of a diamond expert is announced. Lady Yardly, as I
felt sure she would, immediately arranges a robbery—and does it
very well too! But Hercule Poirot, he sees nothing but facts. What
happens in actuality? The lady switches off the light, bangs the
door, throws the necklace down the passage, and screams. She has
already wrenched out the diamond with pliers upstairs——”

“But we saw the necklace round her neck!” I objected.

“I demand pardon, my friend. Her hand concealed the part of it
where the gap would have shown. To place a piece of silk in the
door beforehand is child’s play! Of course, as soon as Rolf read
of the robbery, he arranged his own little comedy. And very well
he played it!”

“What did you say to him?” I asked with lively curiosity.

“I said to him that Lady Yardly had told her husband all, that I
was empowered to recover the jewel, and that if it were not
immediately handed over proceedings would be taken. Also a few more
little lies which occurred to me. He was as wax in my hands!”

I pondered the matter.

“It seems a little unfair on Mary Marvell. She has lost her diamond
through no fault of her own.”

“Bah!” said Poirot brutally. “She has a magnificent advertisement.
That is all she cares for, that one! Now the other, she is
different. _Bonne mère, très femme!_”

“Yes,” I said doubtfully, hardly sharing Poirot’s views on
femininity. “I suppose it was Rolf who sent her the duplicate
letters.”

“_Pas du tout_,” said Poirot briskly. “She came by the advice of
Mary Cavendish to seek my aid in her dilemma. Then she heard that
Mary Marvell, whom she knew to be her enemy, had been here, and
she changed her mind, jumping at a pretext that _you_, my friend,
offered her. A very few questions sufficed to show me that _you_
told her of the letters, not she you! She jumped at the chance your
words offered.”

“I don’t believe it,” I cried, stung.

“_Si, si, mon ami_, it is a pity that you study not the psychology.
She told you that the letters were destroyed? Oh, la la, _never_
does a woman destroy a letter if she can avoid it! Not even if it
would be more prudent to do so!”

“It’s all very well,” I said, my anger rising, “but you’ve made a
perfect fool of me! From beginning to end! No, it’s all very well
to try and explain it away afterwards. There really is a limit!”

“But you were so enjoying yourself, my friend. I had not the heart
to shatter your illusions.”

“It’s no good. You’ve gone a bit too far this time.”

“_Mon Dieu!_ but how you enrage yourself for nothing, _mon ami_!”

“I’m fed up!” I went out, banging the door. Poirot had made an
absolute laughing-stock of me. I decided that he needed a sharp
lesson. I would let some time elapse before I forgave him. He had
encouraged me to make a perfect fool of myself!




  II


  The Tragedy at Marsdon Manor


I had been called away from town for a few days, and on my return
found Poirot in the act of strapping up his small valise.

“_A la bonne heure_, Hastings. I feared you would not have returned
in time to accompany me.”

“You are called away on a case, then?”

“Yes, though I am bound to admit that, on the face of it, the
affair does not seem promising. The Northern Union Insurance
Company have asked me to investigate the death of a Mr. Maltravers
who a few weeks ago insured his life with them for the large sum
of fifty thousand pounds.”

“Yes?” I said, much interested.

“There was, of course, the usual suicide clause in the policy. In
the event of his committing suicide within a year the premiums
would be forfeited. Mr. Maltravers was duly examined by the
Company’s own doctor, and although he was a man slightly past the
prime of life was passed as being in quite sound health. However,
on Wednesday last—the day before yesterday—the body of Mr.
Maltravers was found in the grounds of his house in Essex, Marsdon
Manor, and the cause of his death is described as some kind of
internal hæmorrhage. That in itself would be nothing remarkable,
but sinister rumours as to Mr. Maltravers’ financial position have
been in the air of late, and the Northern Union have ascertained
beyond any possible doubt that the deceased gentleman stood upon
the verge of bankruptcy. Now that alters matters considerably.
Maltravers had a beautiful young wife, and it is suggested that he
got together all the ready money he could for the purpose of paying
the premiums on a life insurance for his wife’s benefit, and then
committed suicide. Such a thing is not uncommon. In any case, my
friend Alfred Wright, who is a director of the Northern Union, has
asked me to investigate the facts of the case, but, as I told him,
I am not very hopeful of success. If the cause of the death had
been heart failure, I should have been more sanguine. Heart failure
may always be translated as the inability of the local G.P. to
discover what his patient really did die of, but a hæmorrhage seems
fairly definite. Still, we can but make some necessary inquiries.
Five minutes to pack your bag, Hastings, and we will take a taxi
to Liverpool Street.”

About an hour later, we alighted from a Great Eastern train at the
little station of Marsdon Leigh. Inquiries at the station yielded
the information that Marsdon Manor was about a mile distant. Poirot
decided to walk, and we betook ourselves along the main street.

“What is our plan of campaign?” I asked.

“First I will call upon the doctor. I have ascertained that there
is only one doctor in Marsdon Leigh, Dr. Ralph Bernard. Ah, here
we are at his house.”

The house in question was a kind of superior cottage, standing back
a little from the road. A brass plate on the gate bore the doctor’s
name. We passed up the path and rang the bell.

We proved to be fortunate in our call. It was the doctor’s
consulting hour, and for the moment there were no patients waiting
for him. Dr. Bernard was an elderly man, high-shouldered and
stooping, with a pleasant vagueness of manner.

Poirot introduced himself and explained the purpose of our visit,
adding that Insurance Companies were bound to investigate fully in
a case of this kind.

“Of course, of course,” said Dr. Bernard vaguely. “I suppose, as
he was such a rich man, his life was insured for a big sum?”

“You consider him a rich man, doctor?”

The doctor looked rather surprised.

“Was he not? He kept two cars, you know, and Marsdon Manor is a
pretty big place to keep up, although I believe he bought it very
cheap.”

“I understand that he had had considerable losses of late,” said
Poirot, watching the doctor narrowly.

The latter, however, merely shook his head sadly.

“Is that so? Indeed. It is fortunate for his wife, then, that there
is this life insurance. A very beautiful and charming young
creature, but terribly unstrung by this sad catastrophe. A mass of
nerves, poor thing. I have tried to spare her all I can, but of
course the shock was bound to be considerable.”

“You had been attending Mr. Maltravers recently?”

“My dear sir, I never attended him.”

“What?”

“I understand Mr. Maltravers was a Christian Scientist—or something
of that kind.”

“But you examined the body?”

“Certainly. I was fetched by one of the under-gardeners.”

“And the cause of death was clear?”

“Absolutely. There was blood on the lips, but most of the bleeding
must have been internal.”

“Was he still lying where he had been found?”

“Yes, the body had not been touched. He was lying at the edge of
a small plantation. He had evidently been out shooting rooks, a
small rook rifle lay beside him. The hæmorrhage must have occurred
quite suddenly. Gastric ulcer, without a doubt.”

“No question of his having been shot, eh?”

“My dear sir!”

“I demand pardon,” said Poirot humbly. “But, if my memory is not
at fault, in the case of a recent murder, the doctor first gave a
verdict of heart failure—altering it when the local constable
pointed out that there was a bullet wound through the head!”

“You will not find any bullet wounds on the body of Mr. Maltravers,”
said Dr. Bernard dryly. “Now, gentlemen, if there is nothing
further——”

We took the hint.

“Good morning, and many thanks to you, doctor, for so kindly
answering our questions. By the way, you saw no need for an
autopsy?”

“Certainly not.” The doctor became quite apoplectic. “The cause of
death was clear, and in my profession we see no need to distress
unduly the relatives of a dead patient.”

And, turning, the doctor slammed the door sharply in our faces.

“And what do you think of Dr. Bernard, Hastings?” inquired Poirot,
as we proceeded on our way to the Manor.

“Rather an old ass.”

“Exactly. Your judgments of character are always profound, my
friend.”

I glanced at him uneasily, but he seemed perfectly serious. A
twinkle, however, came into his eye, and he added slyly:

“That is to say, when there is no question of a beautiful woman!”

I looked at him coldly.

On our arrival at the manor-house, the door was opened to us by a
middle-aged parlourmaid. Poirot handed her his card, and a letter
from the Insurance Company for Mrs. Maltravers. She showed us into
a small morning-room, and retired to tell her mistress. About ten
minutes elapsed, and then the door opened, and a slender figure in
widow’s weeds stood upon the threshold.

“Monsieur Poirot?” she faltered.

“Madame!” Poirot sprang gallantly to his feet and hastened towards
her. “I cannot tell you how I regret to derange you in this way.
But what will you? _Les affaires_—they know no mercy.”

Mrs. Maltravers permitted him to lead her to a chair. Her eyes were
red with weeping, but the temporary disfigurement could not conceal
her extraordinary beauty. She was about twenty-seven or eight, and
very fair, with large blue eyes and a pretty pouting mouth.

“It is something about my husband’s insurance, is it? But must I
be bothered _now_—so soon?”

“Courage, my dear Madame. Courage! You see, your late husband
insured his life for rather a large sum, and in such a case the
Company always has to satisfy itself as to a few details. They have
empowered me to act for them. You can rest assured that I will do
all in my power to render the matter not too unpleasant for you.
Will you recount to me briefly the sad events of Wednesday?”

“I was changing for tea when my maid came up—one of the gardeners
had just run to the house. He had found——”

Her voice trailed away. Poirot pressed her hand sympathetically.

“I comprehend. Enough! You had seen your husband earlier in the
afternoon?”

“Not since lunch. I had walked down to the village for some stamps,
and I believe he was out pottering round the grounds.”

“Shooting rooks, eh?”

“Yes, he usually took his little rook rifle with him, and I heard
one or two shots in the distance.”

“Where is this little rook rifle now?”

“In the hall, I think.”

She led the way out of the room and found and handed the little
weapon to Poirot, who examined it cursorily.

“Two shots fired, I see,” he observed, as he handed it back. “And
now, madame, if I might see——”

He paused delicately.

“The servant shall take you,” she murmured, averting her head.

The parlourmaid, summoned, led Poirot upstairs. I remained with
the lovely and unfortunate woman. It was hard to know whether to
speak or remain silent. I essayed one or two general reflections
to which she responded absently, and in a very few minutes Poirot
rejoined us.

“I thank you for all your courtesy, madame. I do not think you need
be troubled any further with this matter. By the way, do you know
anything of your husband’s financial position?”

She shook her head.

“Nothing whatever. I am very stupid over business things.”

“I see. Then you can give us no clue as to why he suddenly decided
to insure his life? He had not done so previously, I understand.”

“Well, we had only been married a little over a year. But, as to
why he insured his life, it was because he had absolutely made up
his mind that he would not live long. He had a strong premonition
of his own death. I gather that he had had one hæmorrhage already,
and that he knew that another one would prove fatal. I tried to
dispel these gloomy fears of his, but without avail. Alas, he was
only too right!”

Tears in her eyes, she bade us a dignified farewell. Poirot made
a characteristic gesture as we walked down the drive together.

“_Eh bien_, that is that! Back to London, my friend, there appears
to be no mouse in this mouse-hole. And yet——”

“Yet what?”

“A slight discrepancy, that is all! You noticed it? You did not?
Still, life is full of discrepancies, and assuredly the man cannot
have taken his own life—there is no poison that would fill his
mouth with blood. No, no, I must resign myself to the fact that
all here is clear and above-board—but who is this?”

A tall young man was striding up the drive towards us. He passed
us without making any sign, but I noted that he was not ill-looking,
with a lean, deeply bronzed face that spoke of life in a tropic
clime. A gardener who was sweeping up leaves had paused for a
minute in his task, and Poirot ran quickly up to him.

“Tell me, I pray you, who is that gentleman? Do you know him?”

“I don’t remember his name, sir, though I did hear it. He was
staying down here last week for a night. Tuesday, it was.”

“Quick, _mon ami_, let us follow him.”

We hastened up the drive after the retreating figure. A glimpse of
a black-robed figure on the terrace at the side of the house, and
our quarry swerved and we after him, so that we were witnesses of
the meeting.

Mrs. Maltravers almost staggered where she stood, and her face
blanched noticeably.

“You,” she gasped. “I thought you were on the sea—on your way to
East Africa?”

“I got some news from my lawyers that detained me,” explained the
young man. “My old uncle in Scotland died unexpectedly and left me
some money. Under the circumstances I thought it better to cancel
my passage. Then I saw this bad news in the paper and I came down
to see if there was anything I could do. You’ll want some one to
look after things for you a bit perhaps.”

At that moment they became aware of our presence. Poirot stepped
forward, and with many apologies explained that he had left his
stick in the hall. Rather reluctantly, it seemed to me, Mrs.
Maltravers made the necessary introduction.

“Monsieur Poirot, Captain Black.”

A few minutes’ chat ensued, in the course of which Poirot elicited
the fact that Captain Black was putting up at the Anchor Inn. The
missing stick not having been discovered (which was not surprising),
Poirot uttered more apologies and we withdrew.

We returned to the village at a great pace, and Poirot made a bee
line for the Anchor Inn.

“Here we establish ourselves until our friend the Captain returns,”
he explained. “You notice that I emphasized the point that we were
returning to London by the first train? Possibly you thought I
meant it. But no—you observed Mrs. Maltravers’ face when she caught
sight of this young Black? She was clearly taken aback, and he—_eh
bien_, he was very devoted, did you not think so? And he was here
on Tuesday night—the day before Mr. Maltravers died. We must
investigate the doings of Captain Black, Hastings.”

In about half an hour we espied our quarry approaching the inn.
Poirot went out and accosted him and presently brought him up to
the room we had engaged.

“I have been telling Captain Black of the mission which brings us
here,” he explained. “You can understand, _monsieur le capitaine_,
that I am anxious to arrive at Mr. Maltravers’ state of mind
immediately before his death, and that at the same time I do not
wish to distress Mrs. Maltravers unduly by asking her painful
questions. Now, you were here just before the occurrence, and can
give us equally valuable information.”

“I’ll do anything I can to help you, I’m sure,” replied the young
soldier; “but I’m afraid I didn’t notice anything out of the
ordinary. You see, although Maltravers was an old friend of my
people’s, I didn’t know him very well myself.”

“You came down—when?”

“Tuesday afternoon. I went up to town early Wednesday morning, as
my boat sailed from Tilbury about twelve o’clock. But some news I
got made me alter my plans, as I dare say you heard me explain to
Mrs. Maltravers.”

“You were returning to East Africa, I understand?”

“Yes. I’ve been out there ever since the War—a great country.”

“Exactly. Now what was the talk about at dinner on Tuesday night?”

“Oh, I don’t know. The usual odd topics. Maltravers asked after my
people, and then we discussed the question of German reparations,
and then Mrs. Maltravers asked a lot of questions about East
Africa, and I told them one or two yarns, that’s about all, I
think.”

“Thank you.”

Poirot was silent for a moment, then he said gently: “With your
permission, I should like to try a little experiment. You have told
us all that your conscious self knows, I want now to question your
subconscious self.”

“Psychoanalysis, what?” said Black, with visible alarm.

“Oh, no,” said Poirot reassuringly. “You see, it is like this, I
give you a word, you answer with another, and so on. Any word, the
first one you think of. Shall we begin?”

“All right,” said Black slowly, but he looked uneasy.

“Note down the words, please, Hastings,” said Poirot. Then he took
from his pocket his big turnip-faced watch and laid it on the table
beside him. “We will commence. Day.”

There was a moment’s pause, and then Black replied:

“_Night_.”

As Poirot proceeded, his answers came quicker.

“Name,” said Poirot.

“_Place_.”

“Bernard.”

“_Shaw_.”

“Tuesday.”

“_Dinner_.”

“Journey.”

“_Ship_.”

“Country.”

“_Uganda_.”

“Story.”

“_Lions_.”

“Rook Rifle.”

“_Farm_.”

“Shot.”

“_Suicide_.”

“Elephant.”

“_Tusks_.”

“Money.”

“_Lawyers_.”

“Thank you, Captain Black. Perhaps you could spare me a few minutes
in about half an hour’s time?”

“Certainly.” The young soldier looked at him curiously and wiped
his brow as he got up.

“And now, Hastings,” said Poirot, smiling at me as the door closed
behind him. “You see it all, do you not?”

“I don’t know what you mean.”

“Does that list of words tell you nothing?”

I scrutinized it, but was forced to shake my head.

“I will assist you. To begin with, Black answered well within the
normal time limit, with no pauses, so we can take it that he
himself has no guilty knowledge to conceal. ‘Day’ to ‘Night’ and
‘Place’ to ‘Name’ are normal associations. I began work with
‘Bernard’ which might have suggested the local doctor had he come
across him at all. Evidently he had not. After our recent
conversation, he gave ‘Dinner’ to my ‘Tuesday,’ but ‘Journey’ and
‘Country’ were answered by ‘Ship’ and ‘Uganda,’ showing clearly
that it was his journey abroad that was important to him and not
the one which brought him down here. ‘Story’ recalls to him one of
the ‘Lion’ stories he told at dinner. I proceed to ‘Rook Rifle’
and he answered with the totally unexpected word ‘Farm.’ When I
say ‘Shot,’ he answers at once ‘Suicide.’ The association seems
clear. A man he knows committed suicide with a rook rifle on a farm
somewhere. Remember, too, that his mind is still on the stories he
told at dinner, and I think you will agree that I shall not be far
from the truth if I recall Captain Black and ask him to repeat the
particular suicide story which he told at the dinner-table on
Tuesday evening.”

Black was straightforward enough over the matter.

“Yes, I did tell them that story now that I come to think of it.
Chap shot himself on a farm out there. Did it with a rook rifle
through the roof of the mouth, bullet lodged in the brain. Doctors
were no end puzzled over it—there was nothing to show except a
little blood on the lips. But what——”

“What has it got to do with Mr. Maltravers? You did not know, I
see, that he was found with a rook rifle by his side.”

“You mean my story suggested to him—oh, but that is awful!”

“Do not distress yourself—it would have been one way or another.
Well, I must get on the telephone to London.”

Poirot had a lengthy conversation over the wire, and came back
thoughtful. He went off by himself in the afternoon, and it was
not till seven o’clock that he announced that he could put it off
no longer, but must break the news to the young widow. My sympathy
had already gone out to her unreservedly. To be left penniless,
and with the knowledge that her husband had killed himself to
assure her future was a hard burden for any woman to bear. I
cherished a secret hope, however, that young Black might prove
capable of consoling her after her first grief had passed. He
evidently admired her enormously.

Our interview with the lady was painful. She refused vehemently to
believe the facts that Poirot advanced, and when she was at last
convinced broke down into bitter weeping. An examination of the
body turned our suspicions into certainty. Poirot was very sorry
for the poor lady, but, after all, he was employed by the Insurance
Company, and what could he do? As he was preparing to leave he said
gently to Mrs. Maltravers:

“Madame, you of all people should know that there are no dead!”

“What do you mean?” she faltered, her eyes growing wide.

“Have you never taken part in any spiritualistic séances? You are
mediumistic, you know.”

“I have been told so. But you do not believe in Spiritualism,
surely?”

“Madame, I have seen some strange things. You know that they say
in the village that this house is haunted?”

She nodded, and at that moment the parlourmaid announced that
dinner was ready.

“Won’t you just stay and have something to eat?”

We accepted gratefully, and I felt that our presence could not but
help distract her a little from her own griefs.

We had just finished our soup, when there was a scream outside the
door, and the sound of breaking crockery. We jumped up. The
parlourmaid appeared, her hand to her heart.

“It was a man—standing in the passage.”

Poirot rushed out, returning quickly.

“There is no one there.”

“Isn’t there, sir?” said the parlourmaid weakly. “Oh, it did give
me a start!”

“But why?”

She dropped her voice to a whisper.

“I thought—I thought it was the master—it looked like ’im.”

I saw Mrs. Maltravers give a terrified start, and my mind flew to
the old superstition that a suicide cannot rest. She thought of it
too, I am sure, for a minute later, she caught Poirot’s arm with
a scream.

“Didn’t you hear that? Those three taps on the window? That’s how
_he_ always used to tap when he passed round the house.”

“The ivy,” I cried. “It was the ivy against the pane.”

But a sort of terror was gaining on us all. The parlourmaid was
obviously unstrung, and when the meal was over Mrs. Maltravers
besought Poirot not to go at once. She was clearly terrified to be
left alone. We sat in the little morning-room. The wind was getting
up, and moaning round the house in an eerie fashion. Twice the door
of the room came unlatched and the door slowly opened, and each
time she clung to me with a terrified gasp.

“Ah, but this door, it is bewitched!” cried

Poirot angrily at last. He got up and shut it once more, then
turned the key in the lock. “I shall lock it, so!”

“Don’t do that,” she gasped, “if it should come open now——”

And even as she spoke the impossible happened. The locked door
slowly swung open. I could not see into the passage from where I
sat, but she and Poirot were facing it. She gave one long shriek
as she turned to him.

“You saw him—there in the passage?” she cried.

He was staring down at her with a puzzled face, then shook his
head.

“I saw him—my husband—you must have seen him too?”

“Madame, I saw nothing. You are not well—unstrung——”

“I am perfectly well, I——Oh, God!”

Suddenly, without any warning, the lights quivered and went out.
Out of the darkness came three loud raps. I could hear Mrs.
Maltravers moaning.

And then—I saw!

The man I had seen on the bed upstairs stood there facing us,
gleaming with a faint ghostly light. There was blood on his lips,
and he held his right hand out, pointing. Suddenly a brilliant
light seemed to proceed from it. It passed over Poirot and me, and
fell on Mrs. Maltravers. I saw her white terrified face, and
something else!

“My God, Poirot!” I cried. “Look at her hand, her right hand. It’s
all red!”

Her own eyes fell on it, and she collapsed in a heap on the floor.

“Blood,” she cried hysterically. “Yes, it’s blood. I killed him.
I did it. He was showing me, and then I put my hand on the trigger
and pressed. Save me from him—save me! he’s come back!”

Her voice died away in a gurgle.

“Lights,” said Poirot briskly.

The lights went on as if by magic.

“That’s it,” he continued. “You heard, Hastings? And you, Everett?
Oh, by the way, this is Mr. Everett, rather a fine member of the
theatrical profession. I ’phoned to him this afternoon. His make-up
is good, isn’t it? Quite like the dead man, and with a pocket torch
and the necessary phosphorescence he made the proper impression.
I shouldn’t touch her right hand if I were you, Hastings. Red paint
marks so. When the lights went out I clasped her hand, you see. By
the way, we mustn’t miss our train. Inspector Japp is outside the
window. A bad night—but he has been able to while away the time by
tapping on the window every now and then.”

“You see,” continued Poirot, as we walked briskly through the wind
and rain, “there was a little discrepancy. The doctor seemed to
think the deceased was a Christian Scientist, and who could have
given him that impression but Mrs. Maltravers? But to us she
represented him as being in a grave state of apprehension about
his own health. Again, why was she so taken aback by the reappearance
of young Black? And lastly, although I know that convention decrees
that a woman must make a decent pretence of mourning for her
husband, I do not care for such heavily-rouged eyelids! You did
not observe them, Hastings? No? As I always tell you, you see
nothing!”

“Well, there it was. There were the two possibilities. Did Black’s
story suggest an ingenious method of committing suicide to Mr.
Maltravers, or did his other listener, the wife, see an equally
ingenious method of committing murder? I inclined to the latter
view. To shoot himself in the way indicated, he would probably have
had to pull the trigger with his toe—or at least so I imagine.
Now if Maltravers had been found with one boot off, we should
almost certainly have heard of it from some one. An odd detail like
that would have been remembered.

“No, as I say, I inclined to the view that it was a case of murder,
not suicide, but I realized that I had not a shadow of proof in
support of my theory. Hence the elaborate little comedy you saw
played to-night.”

“Even now I don’t quite see all the details of the crime?” I said.

“Let us start from the beginning. Here is a shrewd and scheming
woman who, knowing of her husband’s financial _débâcle_ and tired
of the elderly mate she has only married for his money, induces
him to insure his life for a large sum, and then seeks for the
means to accomplish her purpose. An accident gives her that—the
young soldier’s strange story. The next afternoon when _monsieur
le capitaine_, as she thinks, is on the high seas, she and her
husband are strolling round the grounds. ‘What a curious story that
was last night!’ she observes. ‘Could a man shoot himself in such
a way? Do show me if it is possible!’ The poor fool—he shows her.
He places the end of the rifle in his mouth. She stoops down, and
puts her finger on the trigger, laughing up at him. ‘And now, sir,’
she says saucily, ‘supposing I pull the trigger?’

“And then—and then, Hastings—she pulls it!”




  III


  The Adventure of the Cheap Flat


So far, in the cases which I have recorded, Poirot’s investigations
have started from the central fact, whether murder or robbery, and
have proceeded from thence by a process of logical deduction to
the final triumphant unravelling. In the events I am now about to
chronicle, a remarkable chain of circumstances led from the
apparently trivial incidents which first attracted Poirot’s
attention to the sinister happenings which completed a most unusual
case.

I had been spending the evening with an old friend of mine, Gerald
Parker. There had been, perhaps, about half a dozen people there
besides my host and myself, and the talk fell, as it was bound to
do sooner or later wherever Parker found himself, on the subject
of house-hunting in London. Houses and flats were Parker’s special
hobby. Since the end of the War, he had occupied at least half a
dozen different flats and maisonnettes. No sooner was he settled
anywhere than he would light unexpectedly upon a new find, and
would forthwith depart bag and baggage. His moves were nearly
always accomplished at a slight pecuniary gain, for he had a shrewd
business head, but it was sheer love of the sport that actuated
him, and not a desire to make money at it. We listened to Parker
for some time with the respect of the novice for the expert. Then
it was our turn, and a perfect babel of tongues was let loose.
Finally the floor was left to Mrs. Robinson, a charming little
bride who was there with her husband. I had never met them before,
as Robinson was only a recent acquaintance of Parker’s.

“Talking of flats,” she said, “have you heard of our piece of luck,
Mr. Parker? We’ve got a flat—at last! In Montagu Mansions.”

“Well,” said Parker, “I’ve always said there are plenty of flats—at
a price!”

“Yes, but this isn’t at a price. It’s dirt cheap. Eighty pounds a
year!”

“But—but Montagu Mansions is just off Knightsbridge, isn’t it? Big
handsome building. Or are you talking of a poor relation of the
same name stuck in the slums somewhere?”

“No, it’s the Knightsbridge one. That’s what makes it so wonderful.”

“Wonderful is the word! It’s a blinking miracle. But there must be
a catch somewhere. Big premium, I suppose?”

“No premium!”

“No prem—oh, hold my head, somebody!” groaned Parker.

“But we’ve got to buy the furniture,” continued Mrs. Robinson.

“Ah!” Parker brisked up. “I knew there was a catch!”

“For fifty pounds. And it’s beautifully furnished!”

“I give it up,” said Parker. “The present occupants must be lunatics
with a taste for philanthropy.”

Mrs. Robinson was looking a little troubled. A little pucker
appeared between her dainty brows.

“It _is_ queer, isn’t it? You don’t think that—that—the place is
_haunted_?”

“Never heard of a haunted flat,” declared Parker decisively.

“N-o.” Mrs. Robinson appeared far from convinced. “But there were
several things about it all that struck me as—well, queer.”

“For instance——” I suggested.

“Ah,” said Parker, “our criminal expert’s attention is aroused!
Unburden yourself to him, Mrs. Robinson. Hastings is a great
unraveller of mysteries.”

I laughed, embarrassed but not wholly displeased with the rôle
thrust upon me.

“Oh, not really queer, Captain Hastings, but when we went to the
agents, Stosser and Paul—we hadn’t tried them before because they
only have the expensive Mayfair flats, but we thought at any rate
it would do no harm—everything they offered us was four and five
hundred a year, or else huge premiums, and then, just as we were
going, they mentioned that they had a flat at eighty, but that they
doubted if it would be any good our going there, because it had
been on their books some time and they had sent so many people to
see it that it was almost sure to be taken—‘snapped up’ as the
clerk put it—only people were so tiresome in not letting them know,
and then they went on sending, and people get annoyed at being sent
to a place that had, perhaps, been let some time.”

Mrs. Robinson paused for some much needed breath, and then
continued: “We thanked him, and said that we quite
understood it would probably be no good, but that we should
like an order all the same—just in case. And we went there
straight away in a taxi, for, after all, you never know. No.
4 was on the second floor, and just as we were waiting for
the lift, Elsie Ferguson—she’s a friend of mine, Captain
Hastings, and they are looking for a flat too—came hurrying
down the stairs. ‘Ahead of you for once, my dear,’ she said.
‘But it’s no good. It’s already let.’ That seemed to finish
it, but—well, as John said, the place was very cheap, we
could afford to give more, and perhaps if we offered a
premium.——A horrid thing to do, of course, and I feel quite
ashamed of telling you, but you know what flat-hunting is.”

I assured her that I was well aware that in the struggle for
house-room the baser side of human nature frequently triumphed over
the higher, and that the well-known rule of dog eat dog always
applied.

“So we went up and, would you believe it, the flat wasn’t let at
all. We were shown over it by the maid, and then we saw the
mistress, and the thing was settled then and there. Immediate
possession and fifty pounds for the furniture. We signed the
agreement next day, and we are to move in to-morrow!” Mrs. Robinson
paused triumphantly.

“And what about Mrs. Ferguson?” asked Parker. “Let’s have your
deductions, Hastings.”

“‘Obvious, my dear Watson,’” I quoted lightly. “She went to the
wrong flat.”

“Oh, Captain Hastings, how clever of you!” cried Mrs. Robinson
admiringly.

I rather wished Poirot had been there. Sometimes I have the feeling
that he rather underestimates my capabilities.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The whole thing was rather amusing, and I propounded the thing as
a mock problem to Poirot on the following morning. He seemed
interested, and questioned me rather narrowly as to the rents of
flats in various localities.

“A curious story,” he said thoughtfully. “Excuse me, Hastings, I
must take a short stroll.”

When he returned, about an hour later, his eyes were gleaming with
a peculiar excitement. He laid his stick on the table, and brushed
the nap of his hat with his usual tender care before he spoke.

“It is as well, _mon ami_, that we have no affairs of moment on
hand. We can devote ourselves wholly to the present investigation.”

“What investigation are you talking about?”

“The remarkable cheapness of your friend’s, Mrs. Robinson’s, new
flat.”

“Poirot, you are not serious!”

“I am most serious. Figure to yourself, my friend, that the real
rent of those flats is £350. I have just ascertained that from the
landlord’s agents. And yet this particular flat is being sublet at
eighty pounds! Why?”

“There must be something wrong with it. Perhaps it is haunted, as
Mrs. Robinson suggested.”

Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner.

“Then again how curious it is that her friend tells her the flat
is let, and, when she goes up, behold, it is not so at all!”

“But surely you agree with me that the other woman must have gone
to the wrong flat. That is the only possible solution.”

“You may or may not be right on that point, Hastings. The fact
still remains that numerous other applicants were sent to see it,
and yet, in spite of its remarkable cheapness, it was still in the
market when Mrs. Robinson arrived.”

“That shows that there must be something wrong about it.”

“Mrs. Robinson did not seem to notice anything amiss. Very curious,
is it not? Did she impress you as being a truthful woman, Hastings?”

“She was a delightful creature!”

“_Évidemment!_ since she renders you incapable of replying to my
question. Describe her to me, then.”

“Well, she’s tall and fair; her hair’s really a beautiful shade of
auburn——”

“Always you have had a penchant for auburn hair!” murmured Poirot.
“But continue.”

“Blue eyes and a very nice complexion and—well, that’s all, I
think,” I concluded lamely.

“And her husband?”

“Oh, he’s quite a nice fellow—nothing startling.”

“Dark or fair?”

“I don’t know—betwixt and between, and just an ordinary sort of
face.”

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, there are hundreds of these average men—and, anyway, you
bring more sympathy and appreciation to your description of women.
Do you know anything about these people? Does Parker know them
well.”

“They are just recent acquaintances, I believe. But surely, Poirot,
you don’t think for an instant——”

Poirot raised his hand.

“_Tout doucement, mon ami_. Have I said that I think anything? All
I say is—it is a curious story. And there is nothing to throw light
upon it; except perhaps the lady’s name, eh, Hastings?”

“Her name is Stella,” I said stiffly, “but I don’t see——”

Poirot interrupted me with a tremendous chuckle. Something seemed
to be amusing him vastly.

“And Stella means a star, does it not? Famous!”

“What on earth——”

“And stars give light! _Voilà!_ Calm yourself, Hastings. Do not
put on that air of injured dignity. Come, we will go to Montagu
Mansions and make a few inquiries.”

I accompanied him, nothing loath. The Mansions were a handsome
block of buildings in excellent repair. A uniformed porter was
sunning himself on the threshold, and it was to him that Poirot
addressed himself:

“Pardon, but could you tell me if a Mr. and Mrs. Robinson reside
here?”

The porter was a man of few words and apparently of a sour or
suspicious disposition. He hardly looked at us and grunted out:

“No. 4. Second floor.”

“I thank you. Can you tell me how long they have been here?”

“Six months.”

I started forward in amazement, conscious as I did so of Poirot’s
malicious grin.

“Impossible,” I cried. “You must be making a mistake.”

“Six months.”

“Are you sure? The lady I mean is tall and fair with reddish gold
hair and——”

“That’s ’er,” said the porter. “Come in the Michaelmas quarter,
they did. Just six months ago.”

He appeared to lose interest in us and retreated slowly up the
hall. I followed Poirot outside.

“_Eh bien_, Hastings?” my friend demanded slyly. “Are you so sure
now that delightful women always speak the truth?”

I did not reply.

Poirot had steered his way into Brompton Road before I asked him
what he was going to do and where we were going.

“To the house agents, Hastings. I have a great desire to have a
flat in Montagu Mansions. If I am not mistaken, several interesting
things will take place there before long.”

We were fortunate in our quest. No. 8, on the fourth floor, was to
be let furnished at ten guineas a week. Poirot promptly took it
for a month. Outside in the street again, he silenced my protests:

“But I make money nowadays! Why should I not indulge a whim? By
the way, Hastings, have you a revolver?”

“Yes—somewhere,” I answered, slightly thrilled. “Do you think——”

“That you will need it? It is quite possible. The idea pleases you,
I see. Always the spectacular and romantic appeals to you.”

The following day saw us installed in our temporary home. The flat
was pleasantly furnished. It occupied the same position in the
building as that of the Robinsons, but was two floors higher.

The day after our installation was a Sunday. In the afternoon,
Poirot left the front door ajar, and summoned me hastily as a bang
reverberated from somewhere below.

“Look over the banisters. Are those your friends. Do not let them
see you.”

I craned my neck over the staircase.

“That’s them,” I declared in an ungrammatical whisper.

“Good. Wait awhile.”

About half an hour later, a young woman emerged in brilliant and
varied clothing. With a sigh of satisfaction, Poirot tiptoed back
into the flat.

“_C’est ça_. After the master and mistress, the maid. The flat
should now be empty.”

“What are we going to do?” I asked uneasily.

Poirot had trotted briskly into the scullery and was hauling at
the rope of the coal-lift.

“We are about to descend after the method of the dustbins,” he
explained cheerfully. “No one will observe us. The Sunday concert,
the Sunday ‘afternoon out,’ and finally the Sunday nap after the
Sunday dinner of England—_le rosbif_—all these will distract
attention from the doings of Hercule Poirot. Come, my friend.”

He stepped into the rough wooden contrivance and I followed him
gingerly.

“Are we going to break into the flat?” I asked dubiously.

Poirot’s answer was not too reassuring:

“Not precisely to-day,” he replied.

Pulling on the rope, we descended slowly till we reached the second
floor. Poirot uttered an exclamation of satisfaction as he perceived
that the wooden door into the scullery was open.

“You observe? Never do they bolt these doors in the daytime. And
yet anyone could mount or descend as we have done. At night
yes—though not always then—and it is against that that we are going
to make provision.”

He had drawn some tools from his pocket as he spoke, and at once
set deftly to work, his object being to arrange the bolt so that
it could be pulled back from the lift. The operation only occupied
about three minutes. Then Poirot returned the tools to his pocket,
and we reascended once more to our own domain.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


On Monday Poirot was out all day, but when he returned in the
evening he flung himself into his chair with a sigh of satisfaction.

“Hastings, shall I recount to you a little history? A story after
your own heart and which will remind you of your favourite cinema?”

“Go ahead,” I laughed. “I presume that it is a true story, not one
of your efforts of fancy.”

“It is true enough. Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard will vouch for
its accuracy, since it was through his kind offices that it came
to my ears. Listen, Hastings. A little over six months ago some
important Naval plans were stolen from an American Government
department. They showed the position of some of the most important
Harbour defences, and would be worth a considerable sum to any
foreign Government—that of Japan, for example. Suspicion fell upon
a young man named Luigi Valdarno, an Italian by birth, who was
employed in a minor capacity in the Department and who was missing
at the same time as the papers. Whether Luigi Valdarno was the
thief or not, he was found two days later on the East Side in New
York, shot dead. The papers were not on him. Now for some time past
Luigi Valdarno had been going about with a Miss Elsa Hardt, a young
concert singer who had recently appeared and who lived with a
brother in an apartment in Washington. Nothing was known of the
antecedents of Miss Elsa Hardt, and she disappeared suddenly about
the time of Valdarno’s death. There are reasons for believing that
she was in reality an accomplished international spy who has done
much nefarious work under various _aliases_. The American Secret
Service, whilst doing their best to trace her, also kept an eye
upon certain insignificant Japanese gentlemen living in Washington.
They felt pretty certain that, when Elsa Hardt had covered her
tracks sufficiently, she would approach the gentlemen in question.
One of them left suddenly for England a fortnight ago. On the face
of it, therefore, it would seem that Elsa Hardt is in England.”
Poirot paused, and then added softly: “The official description of
Elsa Hardt is: Height 5 ft. 7, eyes blue, hair auburn, fair
complexion, nose straight, no special distinguishing marks.”

“Mrs. Robinson!” I gasped.

“Well, there is a chance of it, anyhow,” amended Poirot. “Also, I
learn that a swarthy man, a foreigner of some kind, was inquiring
about the occupants of No. 4 only this morning. Therefore, _mon
ami_, I fear that you must forswear your beauty sleep to-night,
and join me in my all-night vigil in the flat below—armed with that
excellent revolver of yours, _bien entendu_!”

“Rather,” I cried with enthusiasm. “When shall we start?”

“The hour of midnight is both solemn and suitable, I fancy. Nothing
is likely to occur before then.”

At twelve o’clock precisely, we crept cautiously into the coal-lift
and lowered ourselves to the second floor. Under Poirot’s
manipulation, the wooden door quickly swung inwards, and we climbed
into the flat. From the scullery we passed into the kitchen where
we established ourselves comfortably in two chairs with the door
into the hall ajar.

“Now we have but to wait,” said Poirot contentedly, closing his
eyes.

To me, the waiting appeared endless. I was terrified of going to
sleep. Just when it seemed to me that I had been there about eight
hours—and had, as I found out afterwards, in reality been exactly
one hour and twenty minutes—a faint scratching sound came to my
ears. Poirot’s hand touched mine. I rose, and together we moved
carefully in the direction of the hall. The noise came from there.
Poirot placed his lips to my ear.

“Outside the front door. They are cutting out the lock. When I give
the word, not before, fall upon him from behind and hold him fast.
Be careful, he will have a knife.”

Presently there was a rending sound, and a little circle of light
appeared through the door. It was extinguished immediately and then
the door was slowly opened. Poirot and I flattened ourselves
against the wall. I heard a man’s breathing as he passed us. Then
he flashed on his torch, and as he did so, Poirot hissed in my ear:

“_Allez_.”

We sprang together, Poirot with a quick movement enveloped the
intruder’s head with a light woollen scarf whilst I pinioned his
arms. The whole affair was quick and noiseless. I twisted a dagger
from his hand, and as Poirot brought down the scarf from his eyes,
whilst keeping it wound tightly round his mouth, I jerked up my
revolver where he could see it and understand that resistance was
useless. As he ceased to struggle Poirot put his mouth close to
his ear and began to whisper rapidly. After a minute the man
nodded. Then enjoining silence with a movement of the hand, Poirot
led the way out of the flat and down the stairs. Our captive
followed, and I brought up the rear with the revolver. When we were
out in the street, Poirot turned to me.

“There is a taxi waiting just round the corner. Give me the
revolver. We shall not need it now.”

“But if this fellow tries to escape?”

Poirot smiled.

“He will not.”

I returned in a minute with the waiting taxi. The scarf had been
unwound from the stranger’s face, and I gave a start of surprise.

“He’s not a Jap,” I ejaculated in a whisper to Poirot.

“Observation was always your strong point, Hastings! Nothing
escapes you. No, the man is not a Jap. He is an Italian.”

We got into the taxi, and Poirot gave the driver an address in St.
John’s Wood. I was by now completely fogged. I did not like to ask
Poirot where we were going in front of our captive, and strove in
vain to obtain some light upon the proceedings.

We alighted at the door of a small house standing back from the
road. A returning wayfarer, slightly drunk, was lurching along the
pavement and almost collided with Poirot, who said something
sharply to him which I did not catch. All three of us went up the
steps of the house. Poirot rang the bell and motioned us to stand
a little aside. There was no answer and he rang again and then
seized the knocker which he plied for some minutes vigorously.

A light appeared suddenly above the fanlight, and the door was
opened cautiously a little way.

“What the devil do you want?” a man’s voice demanded harshly.

“I want the doctor. My wife is taken ill.”

“There’s no doctor here.”

The man prepared to shut the door, but Poirot thrust his foot in
adroitly. He became suddenly a perfect caricature of an infuriated
Frenchman.

“What you say, there is no doctor? I will have the law of you. You
must come! I will stay here and ring and knock all night.”

“My dear sir——” The door was opened again, the man, clad in a
dressing-gown and slippers, stepped forward to pacify Poirot with
an uneasy glance round.

“I will call the police.”

Poirot prepared to descend the steps.

“No, don’t do that for Heaven’s sake!” The man dashed after him.

With a neat push Poirot sent him staggering down the steps. In
another minute all three of us were inside the door and it was
pushed to and bolted.

“Quick—in here.” Poirot led the way into the nearest room switching
on the light as he did so. “And you—behind the curtain.”

“Si, signor,” said the Italian and slid rapidly behind the full
folds of rose-coloured velvet which draped the embrasure of the
window.

Not a minute too soon. Just as he disappeared from view a woman
rushed into the room. She was tall with reddish hair and held a
scarlet kimono round her slender form.

“Where is my husband?” she cried, with a quick frightened glance.
“Who are you?”

Poirot stepped forward with a bow.

“It is to be hoped your husband will not suffer from a chill. I
observed that he had slippers on his feet, and that his dressing-gown
was a warm one.”

“Who are you? What are you doing in my house?”

“It is true that none of us have the pleasure of your acquaintance,
madame. It is especially to be regretted as one of our number has
come specially from New York in order to meet you.”

The curtains parted and the Italian stepped out. To my horror I
observed that he was brandishing my revolver, which Poirot must
doubtless have put down through inadvertence in the cab.

The woman gave a piercing scream and turned to fly, but Poirot was
standing in front of the closed door.

“Let me by,” she shrieked. “He will murder me.”

“Who was it dat croaked Luigi Valdarno?” asked the Italian hoarsely,
brandishing the weapon, and sweeping each one of us with it. We
dared not move.

“My God, Poirot, this is awful. What shall we do?” I cried.

“You will oblige me by refraining from talking so much, Hastings.
I can assure you that our friend will not shoot until I give the
word.”

“Youse sure o’ dat, eh?” said the Italian, leering unpleasantly.

It was more than I was, but the woman turned to Poirot like a
flash.

“What is it you want?”

Poirot bowed.

“I do not think it is necessary to insult Miss Elsa Hardt’s
intelligence by telling her.”

With a swift movement, the woman snatched up a big black velvet
cat which served as a cover for the telephone.

“They are stitched in the lining of that.”

“Clever,” murmured Poirot appreciatively. He stood aside from the
door. “Good evening, madame. I will detain your friend from New
York whilst you make your getaway.”

“Whatta fool!” roared the big Italian, and raising the revolver he
fired point-blank at the woman’s retreating figure just as I flung
myself upon him.

But the weapon merely clicked harmlessly and Poirot’s voice rose
in mild reproof.

“Never will you trust your old friend, Hastings. I do not care for
my friends to carry loaded pistols about with them and never would
I permit a mere acquaintance to do so. No, no, _mon ami_.” This to
the Italian who swearing hoarsely. Poirot continued to address him
in a tone of mild reproof: “See now, what I have done for you. I
have saved you from being hanged. And do not think that our
beautiful lady will escape. No, no, the house is watched, back and
front. Straight into the arms of the police they will go. Is not
that a beautiful and consoling thought? Yes, you may leave the room
now. But be careful—be very careful. I——Ah, he is gone! And my
friend Hastings looks at me with eyes of reproach. But it was all
so simple! It was clear, from the first, that out of several
hundred, probably, applicants for No. 4, Montagu Mansions only the
Robinsons were considered suitable. Why? What was there that
singled them out from the rest—at practically a glance. Their
appearance? Possibly, but it was not so unusual. Their name, then!”

“But there’s nothing unusual about the name of Robinson,” I cried.
“It’s quite a common name.”

“Ah! _Sapristi_, but exactly! That was the point. Elsa Hardt and
her husband, or brother or whatever he really is, come from New
York, and take a flat in the name of Mr. and Mrs. Robinson. Suddenly
they learn that one of these secret societies, the Mafia, or the
Camorra, to which doubtless Luigi Valdarno belonged, is on their
track. What do they do? They hit on a scheme of transparent
simplicity. Evidently they knew that their pursuers were not
personally acquainted with either of them. What then can be simpler?
They offer the flat at an absurdly low rental. Of the thousands of
young couples in London looking for flats, there cannot fail to be
several Robinsons. It is only a matter of waiting. If you will look
at the name of Robinson in the telephone directory, you will
realize that a fair-haired Mrs. Robinson was pretty sure to come
along sooner or later. Then what will happen? The avenger arrives.
He knows the name, he knows the address. He strikes! All is over,
vengeance is satisfied, and Miss Elsa Hardt has escaped by the skin
of her teeth once more. By the way, Hastings, you must present me
to the real Mrs. Robinson—that delightful and truthful creature!
What will they think when they find their flat has been broken
into! We must hurry back. Ah, that sounds like Japp and his friends
arriving.”

A mighty tattoo sounded on the knocker.

“How did you know this address?” I asked as I followed Poirot out
into the hall. “Oh, of course, you had the first Mrs. Robinson
followed when she left the other flat.”

“_A la bonne heure_, Hastings. You use your grey cells at last.
Now for a little surprise for Japp.”

Softly unbolting the door, he stuck the cat’s head round the edge
and ejaculated a piercing “Miaow.”

The Scotland Yard inspector, who was standing outside with another
man, jumped in spite of himself.

“Oh, it’s only Monsieur Poirot at one of his little jokes!” he
exclaimed, as Poirot’s head followed that of the cat. “Let us in,
moosior.”

“You have our friends safe and sound?”

“Yes, we’ve got the birds all right. But they hadn’t got the goods
with them.”

“I see. So you come to search. Well, I am about to depart with
Hastings, but I should like to give you a little lecture upon the
history and habits of the domestic cat.”

“For the Lord’s sake, have you gone completely balmy?”

“The cat,” declaimed Poirot, “was worshipped by the ancient
Egyptians. It is still regarded as a symbol of good luck if a black
cat crosses your path. This cat crossed your path to-night, Japp.
To speak of the interior of any animal or any person is not, I
know, considered polite in England. But the interior of this cat
is perfectly delicate. I refer to the lining.”

With a sudden grunt, the second man seized the cat from Poirot’s
hand.

“Oh, I forgot to introduce you,” said Japp. “Mr. Poirot, this is
Mr. Burt of the United States Secret Service.”

The American’s trained fingers had felt what he was looking for.
He held out his hand, and for a moment speech failed him. Then he
rose to the occasion.

“Pleased to meet you,” said Mr. Burt.




  IV


  The Mystery of Hunter’s Lodge


“After all,” murmured Poirot, “it is possible that I shall not die
this time.”

Coming from a convalescent influenza patient, I hailed the remark
as showing a beneficial optimism. I myself had been the first
sufferer from the disease. Poirot in his turn had gone down. He
was now sitting up in bed, propped up with pillows, his head
muffled in a woollen shawl, and was slowly sipping a particularly
noxious tisane which I had prepared according to his directions.
His eye rested with pleasure upon a neatly graduated row of medicine
bottles which adorned the mantelpiece.

“Yes, yes,” my little friend continued. “Once more shall I be
myself again, the great Hercule Poirot, the terror of evil-doers!
Figure to yourself, _mon ami_, that I have a little paragraph to
myself in _Society Gossip_. But yes! Here it is! ‘Go it—criminals—all
out! Hercule Poirot—and believe me, girls, he’s some Hercules!—our
own pet society detective can’t get a grip on you. ’Cause why?
’Cause he’s got _la grippe_ himself’!”

I laughed.

“Good for you, Poirot. You are becoming quite a public character.
And fortunately you haven’t missed anything of particular interest
during this time.”

“That is true. The few cases I have had to decline did not fill me
with any regret.”

Our landlady stuck her head in at the door.

“There’s a gentleman downstairs. Says he must see Monsieur Poirot
or you, Captain. Seeing as he was in a great to-do—and with all
that quite the gentleman—I brought up ’is card.”

She handed me the bit of pasteboard. “Mr. Roger Havering,” I read.

Poirot motioned with his head towards the bookcase, and I obediently
pulled forth “Who’s Who.” Poirot took it from me and scanned the
pages rapidly.

“Second son of fifth Baron Windsor. Married 1913 Zoe, fourth
daughter of William Crabb.”

“H’m!” I said. “I rather fancy that’s the girl who used to act at
the Frivolity—only she called herself Zoe Carrisbrook. I remember
she married some young man about town just before the War.”

“Would it interest you, Hastings, to go down and hear what our
visitor’s particular little trouble is? Make him all my excuses.”

Roger Havering was a man of about forty, well set up and of smart
appearance. His face, however, was haggard, and he was evidently
labouring under great agitation.

“Captain Hastings? You are Monsieur Poirot’s partner, I understand.
It is imperative that he should come with me to Derbyshire to-day.”

“I’m afraid that’s impossible,” I replied. “Poirot is ill in
bed—influenza.”

His face fell.

“Dear me, that is a great blow to me.”

“The matter on which you want to consult him is serious?”

“My God, yes! My uncle, the best friend I have in the world, was
foully murdered last night.”

“Here in London?”

“No, in Derbyshire. I was in town and received a telegram from my
wife this morning. Immediately upon its receipt I determined to
come round and beg Monsieur Poirot to undertake the case.”

“If you will excuse me a minute,” I said, struck by a sudden idea.

I rushed upstairs, and in a few brief words acquainted Poirot with
the situation. He took any further words out of my mouth.

“I see. I see. You want to go yourself, is it not so? Well, why
not? You should know my methods by now. All I ask is that you
should report to me fully every day, and follow implicitly any
instructions I may wire you.”

To this I willingly agreed.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


An hour later I was sitting opposite Mr. Havering in a first-class
carriage on the Midland Railway, speeding rapidly away from London.

“To begin with, Captain Hastings, you must understand that Hunter’s
Lodge, where we are going, and where the tragedy took place, is
only a small shooting-box in the heart of the Derbyshire moors.
Our real home is near Newmarket, and we usually rent a flat in town
for the season. Hunter’s Lodge is looked after by a housekeeper
who is quite capable of doing all we need when we run down for an
occasional week-end. Of course, during the shooting season, we take
down some of our own servants from Newmarket. My uncle, Mr.
Harrington Pace (as you may know, my mother was a Miss Pace of New
York), has, for the last three years, made his home with us. He
never got on well with my father, or my elder brother, and I
suspect that my being somewhat of a prodigal son myself rather
increased than diminished his affection towards me. Of course I am
a poor man, and my uncle was a rich one—in other words, he paid
the piper! But, though exacting in many ways, he was not really
hard to get on with, and we all three lived very harmoniously
together. Two days ago my uncle, rather wearied with some recent
gaieties of ours in town, suggested that we should run down to
Derbyshire for a day or two. My wife telegraphed to Mrs. Middleton,
the housekeeper, and we went down that same afternoon. Yesterday
evening I was forced to return to town, but my wife and my uncle
remained on. This morning I received this telegram.” He handed it
over to me:

“Come at once uncle Harrington murdered last night bring good
detective if you can but do come—Zoe.”

“Then, as yet you know no details?”

“No, I suppose it will be in the evening papers. Without doubt the
police are in charge.”

It was about three o’clock when we arrived at the little station
of Elmer’s Dale. From there a five-mile drive brought us to a small
grey stone building in the midst of the rugged moors.

“A lonely place,” I observed with a shiver.

Havering nodded.

“I shall try and get rid of it. I could never live here again.”

We unlatched the gate and were walking up the narrow path to the
oak door when a familiar figure emerged and came to meet us.

“Japp!” I ejaculated.

The Scotland Yard inspector grinned at me in a friendly fashion
before addressing my companion.

“Mr. Havering, I think? I’ve been sent down from London to take
charge of this case, and I’d like a word with you, if I may, sir.”

“My wife——”

“I’ve seen your good lady, sir—and the housekeeper. I won’t keep
you a moment, but I’m anxious to get back to the village now that
I’ve seen all there is to see here.”

“I know nothing as yet as to what——”

“Ex-actly,” said Japp soothingly. “But there are just one or two
little points I’d like your opinion about all the same. Captain
Hastings here, he knows me, and he’ll go on up to the house and
tell them you’re coming. What have you done with the little man,
by the way, Captain Hastings?”

“He’s ill in bed with influenza.”

“Is he now? I’m sorry to hear that. Rather the case of the cart
without the horse, your being here without him, isn’t it?”

And on his rather ill-timed jest I went on to the house. I rang
the bell, as Japp had closed the door behind him. After some
moments it was opened to me by a middle-aged woman in black.

“Mr. Havering will be here in a moment,” I explained. “He has been
detained by the inspector. I have come down with him from London
to look into the case. Perhaps you can tell me briefly what occurred
last night.”

“Come inside, sir.” She closed the door behind me, and we stood in
the dimly-lighted hall. “It was after dinner last night, sir, that
the man came. He asked to see Mr. Pace, sir, and, seeing that he
spoke the same way, I thought it was an American gentleman friend
of Mr. Pace’s and I showed him into the gun-room, and then went to
tell Mr. Pace. He wouldn’t give any name, which, of course, was a
bit odd, now I come to think of it. I told Mr. Pace, and he seemed
puzzled like, but he said to the mistress: ‘Excuse me, Zoe, while
I just see what this fellow wants.’ He went off to the gun-room,
and I went back to the kitchen, but after a while I heard loud
voices, as if they were quarrelling, and I came out into the hall.
At the same time, the mistress she comes out too, and just then
there was a shot and then a dreadful silence. We both ran to the
gun-room door, but it was locked and we had to go round to the
window. It was open, and there inside was Mr. Pace, all shot and
bleeding.”

“What became of the man?”

“He must have got away through the window, sir, before we got to
it.”

“And then?”

“Mrs. Havering sent me to fetch the police. Five miles to walk it
was. They came back with me, and the constable he stayed all night,
and this morning the police gentleman from London arrived.”

“What was this man like who called to see Mr. Pace?”

The housekeeper reflected.

“He had a black beard, sir, and was about middle-aged, and had on
a light overcoat. Beyond the fact that he spoke like an American
I didn’t notice much about him.”

“I see. Now I wonder if I can see Mrs. Havering?”

“She’s upstairs, sir. Shall I tell her?”

“If you please. Tell her that Mr. Havering is outside with Inspector
Japp, and that the gentleman he has brought back with him from
London is anxious to speak to her as soon as possible.”

“Very good, sir.”

I was in a fever of impatience to get at all the facts. Japp had
two or three hours’ start of me, and his anxiety to be gone made
me keen to be close at his heels.

Mrs. Havering did not keep me waiting long. In a few minutes I
heard a light step descending the stairs, and looked up to see a
very handsome young woman coming towards me. She wore a
flame-coloured jumper, that set off the slender boyishness of her
figure. On her dark head was a little hat of flame-coloured leather.
Even the present tragedy could not dim the vitality of her
personality.

I introduced myself, and she nodded in quick comprehension.

“Of course I have often heard of you and your colleague, Monsieur
Poirot. You have done some wonderful things together, haven’t you?
It was very clever of my husband to get you so promptly. Now will
you ask me questions? That is the easiest way, isn’t it, of getting
to know all you want to about this dreadful affair?”

“Thank you, Mrs. Havering. Now what time was it that this man
arrived?”

“It must have been just before nine o’clock. We had finished
dinner, and were sitting over our coffee and cigarettes.”

“Your husband had already left for London?”

“Yes, he went up by the 6.15.”

“Did he go by car to the station, or did he walk?”

“Our own car isn’t down here. One came out from the garage in
Elmer’s Dale to fetch him in time for the train.”

“Was Mr. Pace quite his usual self?”

“Absolutely. Most normal in every way.”

“Now, can you describe this visitor at all?”

“I’m afraid not. I didn’t see him. Mrs. Middleton showed him
straight into the gun-room and then came to tell my uncle.”

“What did your uncle say?”

“He seemed rather annoyed, but went off at once. It was about five
minutes later that I heard the sound of raised voices. I ran out
into the hall and almost collided with Mrs. Middleton. Then we
heard the shot. The gun-room door was locked on the inside, and we
had to go right round the house to the window. Of course that took
some time, and the murderer had been able to get well away. My poor
uncle”—her voice faltered—“had been shot through the head. I saw
at once that he was dead. I sent Mrs. Middleton for the police. I
was careful to touch nothing in the room but to leave it exactly
as I found it.”

I nodded approval.

“Now, as to the weapon?”

“Well, I can make a guess at it, Captain Hastings. A pair of
revolvers of my husband’s were mounted upon the wall. One of them
is missing. I pointed this out to the police, and they took the
other one away with them. When they have extracted the bullet, I
suppose they will know for certain.”

“May I go to the gun-room?”

“Certainly. The police have finished with it. But the body has been
removed.”

She accompanied me to the scene of the crime. At that moment Havering
entered the hall, and with a quick apology his wife ran to him. I
was left to undertake my investigations alone.

I may as well confess at once that they were rather disappointing.
In detective novels clues abound, but here I could find nothing
that struck me as out of the ordinary except a large bloodstain on
the carpet where I judged the dead man had fallen. I examined
everything with painstaking care and took a couple of pictures of
the room with my little camera which I had brought with me. I also
examined the ground outside the window, but it appeared to have
been so heavily trampled underfoot that I judged it was useless to
waste time over it. No, I had seen all that Hunter’s Lodge had to
show me. I must go back to Elmer’s Dale and get into touch with
Japp. Accordingly I took leave of the Haverings, and was driven
off in the car that had brought us up from the station.

I found Japp at the Matlock Arms and he took me forthwith to see
the body. Harrington Pace was a small, spare clean-shaven man,
typically American in appearance. He had been shot through the back
of the head, and the revolver had been discharged at close quarters.

“Turned away for a moment,” remarked Japp, “and the other fellow
snatched up a revolver and shot him. The one Mrs. Havering handed
over to us was fully loaded and I suppose the other one was also.
Curious what darn fool things people do. Fancy keeping two loaded
revolvers hanging up on your wall.”

“What do you think of the case?” I asked, as we left the gruesome
chamber behind us.

“Well, I’d got my eye on Havering to begin with. Oh, yes!” noting
my exclamation of astonishment. “Havering has one or two shady
incidents in his past. When he was a boy at Oxford there was some
funny business about the signature on one of his father’s cheques.
All hushed up of course. Then, he’s pretty heavily in debt now,
and they’re the kind of debts he wouldn’t like to go to his uncle
about, whereas you may be sure the uncle’s will would be in his
favour. Yes, I’d got my eye on him, and that’s why I wanted to
speak to him before he saw his wife, but their statements dovetail
all right, and I’ve been to the station and there’s no doubt
whatever that he left by the 6.15. That gets up to London about
10.30. He went straight to his club, he says, and if that’s
confirmed all right—why, he couldn’t have been shooting his uncle
here at nine o’clock in a black beard!”

“Ah, yes, I was going to ask you what you thought about that
beard?”

Japp winked.

“I think it grew pretty fast—grew in the five miles from Elmer’s
Dale to Hunter’s Lodge. Americans that I’ve met are mostly
clean-shaven. Yes, it’s amongst Mr. Pace’s American associates that
we’ll have to look for the murderer. I questioned the housekeeper
first, and then her mistress, and their stories agree all right,
but I’m sorry Mrs. Havering didn’t get a look at the fellow. She’s
a smart woman, and she might have noticed something that would set
us on the track.”

I sat down and wrote a minute and lengthy account to Poirot. I was
able to add various further items of information before I posted
the letter.

The bullet had been extracted and was proved to have been fired
from a revolver identical with the one held by the police.
Furthermore, Mr. Havering’s movements on the night in question had
been checked and verified, and it was proved beyond doubt that he
had actually arrived in London by the train in question. And,
thirdly, a sensational development had occurred. A city gentleman,
living at Ealing, on crossing Haven Green to get to the District
Railway Station that morning, had observed a brown-paper parcel
stuck between the railings. Opening it, he found that it contained
a revolver. He handed the parcel over to the local police station,
and before night it was proved to be the one we were in search of,
the fellow to that given us by Mrs. Havering. One bullet had been
fired from it.

All this I added to my report. A wire from Poirot arrived whilst
I was at breakfast the following morning:

“Of course black bearded man was not Havering only you or Japp
would have such an idea wire me description of housekeeper and what
clothes she wore this morning same of Mrs. Havering do not waste
time taking photographs of interiors they are underexposed and not
in the least artistic.”

It seemed to me that Poirot’s style was unnecessarily facetious.
I also fancied he was a shade jealous of my position on the spot
with full facilities for handling the case. His request for a
description of the clothes worn by the two women appeared to me to
be simply ridiculous, but I complied as well as I, a mere man, was
able to.

At eleven a reply wire came from Poirot:

“Advise Japp arrest housekeeper before it is too late.”

Dumbfounded, I took the wire to Japp. He swore softly under his
breath.

“He’s the goods, Monsieur Poirot! If he says so, there’s something
in it. And I hardly noticed the woman. I don’t know that I can go
so far as arresting her, but I’ll have her watched. We’ll go up
right away, and take another look at her.”

But it was too late. Mrs. Middleton, that quiet middle-aged woman,
who had appeared so normal and respectable, had vanished into thin
air. Her box had been left behind. It contained only ordinary
wearing apparel. There was no clue in it to her identity, or as to
her whereabouts.

From Mrs. Havering we elicited all the facts we could:

“I engaged her about three weeks ago when Mrs. Emery, our former
housekeeper, left. She came to me from Mrs. Selbourne’s Agency in
Mount Street—a very well-known place. I get all my servants from
there. They sent several women to see me, but this Mrs. Middleton
seemed much the nicest, and had splendid references. I engaged her
on the spot, and notified the Agency of the fact. I can’t believe
that there was anything wrong with her. She was such a nice quiet
woman.”

The thing was certainly a mystery. Whilst it was clear that the
woman herself could not have committed the crime, since at the
moment the shot was fired Mrs. Havering was with her in the hall,
nevertheless she must have some connection with the murder, or why
should she suddenly take to her heels and bolt?

I wired the latest development to Poirot and suggested returning
to London and making inquiries at Selbourne’s Agency.

Poirot’s reply was prompt:

“Useless to inquire at agency they will never have heard of her
find out what vehicle took her up to hunters lodge when she first
arrived there.”

Though mystified, I was obedient. The means of transport in Elmer’s
Dale were limited. The local garage had two battered Ford cars,
and there were two station flies. None of these had been
requisitioned on the date in question. Questioned, Mrs. Havering
explained that she had given the woman the money for her fare down
to Derbyshire and sufficient to hire a car or fly to take her up
to Hunter’s Lodge. There was usually one of the Fords at the
station on the chance of its being required. Taking into
consideration the further fact that nobody at the station had
noticed the arrival of a stranger, black-bearded or otherwise, on
the fatal evening, everything seemed to point to the conclusion
that the murderer had come to the spot in a car, which had been
waiting near at hand to aid his escape, and that the same car had
brought the mysterious housekeeper to her new post. I may mention
that inquiries at the Agency in London bore out Poirot’s
prognostication. No such woman as “Mrs. Middleton” had ever been
on their books. They had received the Hon. Mrs. Havering’s
application for a housekeeper, and had sent her various applicants
for the post. When she sent them the engagement fee, she omitted
to mention which woman she had selected.

Somewhat crestfallen, I returned to London. I found Poirot
established in an arm-chair by the fire in a garish, silk
dressing-gown. He greeted me with much affection.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings! But how glad I am to see you. Veritably I have
for you a great affection. And you have enjoyed yourself? You have
run to and fro with the good Japp? You have interrogated and
investigated to your heart’s content?”

“Poirot,” I cried, “the thing’s a dark mystery! It will never be
solved.”

“It is true that we are not likely to cover ourselves with glory
over it.”

“No, indeed. It’s a hard nut to crack.”

“Oh, as far as that goes, I am very good at cracking the nuts! A
veritable squirrel! It is not that which embarrasses me. I know
well enough who killed Mr. Harrington Pace.”

“You know? How did you find out?”

“Your illuminating answers to my wires supplied me with the truth.
See here, Hastings, let us examine the facts methodically and in
order. Mr. Harrington Pace is a man with a considerable fortune
which at his death will doubtless pass to his nephew. Point No. 1.
His nephew is known to be desperately hard up. Point No. 2. His
nephew is also known to be—shall we say a man of rather loose
moral fibre? Point No. 3.”

“But Roger Havering is proved to have journeyed straight up to
London.”

“_Précisément_—and therefore, as Mr. Havering left Elmer’s Dale at
6.15, and since Mr. Pace cannot have been killed before he left,
or the doctor would have spotted the time of the crime as being
given wrongly when he examined the body, we conclude quite rightly,
that Mr. Havering did not shoot his uncle. But there is a Mrs.
Havering, Hastings.”

“Impossible! The housekeeper was with her when the shot was fired.”

“Ah, yes, the housekeeper. But she has disappeared.”

“She will be found.”

“I think not. There is something peculiarly elusive about that
housekeeper, don’t you think so, Hastings? It struck me at once.”

“She played her part, I suppose, and then got out in the nick of
time.”

“And what was her part?”

“Well, presumably to admit her confederate, the black-bearded man.”

“Oh, no, that was not her part! Her part was what you have just
mentioned, to provide an alibi for Mrs. Havering at the moment the
shot was fired. And no one will ever find her, _mon ami_, because
she does not exist! ‘There’s no sech person,’ as your so great
Shakespeare says.”

“It was Dickens,” I murmured, unable to suppress a smile. “But what
do you mean, Poirot?”

“I mean that Zoe Havering was an actress before her marriage, that
you and Japp only saw the housekeeper in a dark hall, a dim
middle-aged figure in black with a faint subdued voice, and finally
that neither you nor Japp, nor the local police whom the housekeeper
fetched, ever saw Mrs. Middleton and her mistress at one and the
same time. It was child’s play for that clever and daring woman.
On the pretext of summoning her mistress, she runs upstairs, slips
on a bright jumper and a hat with black curls attached which she
jams down over the grey transformation. A few deft touches, and
the make-up is removed, a slight dusting of rouge, and the brilliant
Zoe Havering comes down with her clear ringing voice. Nobody looks
particularly at the housekeeper. Why should they? There is nothing
to connect her with the crime. She, too, has an alibi.”

“But the revolver that was found at Ealing? Mrs. Havering could
not have placed it there?”

“No, that was Roger Havering’s job—but it was a mistake on their
part. It put me on the right track. A man who has committed a
murder with a revolver which he found on the spot would fling it
away at once, he would not carry it up to London with him. No, the
motive was clear, the criminals wished to focus the interest of
the police on a spot far removed from Derbyshire they were anxious
to get the police away as soon as possible from the vicinity of
Hunter’s Lodge. Of course the revolver found at Ealing was not the
one with which Mr. Pace was shot. Roger Havering discharged one
shot from it, brought it up to London, went straight to his club
to establish his alibi, then went quickly out to Ealing by the
district, a matter of about twenty minutes only, placed the parcel
where it was found and so back to town. That charming creature,
his wife, quietly shoots Mr. Pace after dinner—you remember he was
shot from behind? Another significant point, that!—reloads the
revolver and puts it back in its place, and then starts off with
her desperate little comedy.”

“It’s incredible,” I murmured, fascinated, “and yet——”

“And yet it is true. _Bien sur_, my friend, it is true. But to
bring that precious pair to justice, that is another matter. Well,
Japp must do what he can—I have written him fully—but I very much
fear, Hastings, that we shall be obliged to leave them to Fate, or
_le bon Dieu_, whichever you prefer.”

“The wicked flourish like a green bay tree,” I reminded him.

“But at a price, Hastings, always at a price, _croyez-moi!_”

Poirot’s forebodings were confirmed. Japp, though convinced of the
truth of his theory, was unable to get together the necessary
evidence to ensure a conviction.

Mr. Pace’s huge fortune passed into the hands of his murderers.
Nevertheless, Nemesis did overtake them, and when I read in the
paper that the Hon. Roger and Mrs. Havering were amongst those
killed in the crashing of the Air Mail to Paris I knew that Justice
was satisfied.




  V

  The Million Dollar Bond Robbery

“What a number of bond robberies there have been lately!” I observed
one morning, laying aside the newspaper. “Poirot, let us forsake
the science of detection, and take to crime instead!”

“You are on the—how do you say it?—get-rich-quick tack, eh, _mon
ami_?”

“Well, look at this last _coup_, the million dollars’ worth of
Liberty Bonds which the London and Scottish Bank were sending to
New York, and which disappeared in such a remarkable manner on
board the _Olympia_.”

“If it were not for the _mal de mer_, and the difficulty of
practising the so excellent method of Laverguier for a longer time
than the few hours of crossing the channel, I should delight to
voyage myself on one of these big liners,” murmured Poirot dreamily.

“Yes, indeed,” I said enthusiastically. “Some of them must be
perfect palaces; the swimming-baths, the lounges, the restaurant,
the palm courts—really, it must be hard to believe that one is on
the sea.”

“Me, I always know when I am on the sea,” said Poirot sadly. “And
all those bagatelles that you enumerate, they say nothing to me;
but, my friend, consider for a moment the geniuses that travel as
it were incognito! On board these floating palaces, as you so
justly call them, one would meet the élite, the _haute noblesse_
of the criminal world!”

I laughed.

“So that’s the way your enthusiasm runs! You would have liked to
cross swords with the man who sneaked the Liberty Bonds?”

The landlady interrupted us.

“A young lady as wants to see you, Mr. Poirot. Here’s her card.”

The card bore the inscription: Miss Esmée Farquhar, and Poirot,
after diving under the table to retrieve a stray crumb, and putting
it carefully in the waste-paper-basket, nodded to the landlady to
admit her.

In another minute one of the most charming girls I have ever seen
was ushered into the room. She was perhaps about five-and-twenty,
with big brown eyes and a perfect figure. She was well-dressed and
perfectly composed in manner.

“Sit down, I beg of you, mademoiselle. This is my friend, Captain
Hastings, who aids me in my little problems.”

“I am afraid it is a big problem I have brought you to-day, Monsieur
Poirot,” said the girl, giving me a pleasant bow as she seated
herself. “I dare say you have read about it in the papers. I am
referring to the theft of Liberty Bonds on the _Olympia_.” Some
astonishment must have shown itself in Poirot’s face, for she
continued quickly: “You are doubtless asking yourself what I have
to do with a grave institution like the London and Scottish Bank.
In one sense nothing, in another sense everything. You see, Monsieur
Poirot, I am engaged to Mr. Philip Ridgeway.”

“Aha! and Mr. Philip Ridgeway——”

“Was in charge of the bonds when they were stolen. Of course no
actual blame can attach to him, it was not his fault in any way.
Nevertheless, he is half distraught over the matter, and his uncle,
I know, insists that he must carelessly have mentioned having them
in his possession. It is a terrible set-back in his career.”

“Who is his uncle?”

“Mr. Vavasour, joint general manager of the London and Scottish
Bank.”

“Suppose, Miss Farquhar, that you recount to me the whole story?”

“Very well. As you know, the Bank wished to extend their credits
in America, and for this purpose decided to send over a million
dollars in Liberty Bonds. Mr. Vavasour selected his nephew, who
had occupied a position of trust in the Bank for many years and
who was conversant with all the details of the Bank’s dealings in
New York, to make the trip. The Olympia sailed from Liverpool on
the 23rd, and the bonds were handed over to Philip on the morning
of that day by Mr. Vavasour and Mr. Shaw, the two joint general
managers of the London and Scottish Bank. They were counted,
enclosed in a package, and sealed in his presence, and he then
locked the package at once in his portmanteau.”

“A portmanteau with an ordinary lock?”

“No, Mr. Shaw insisted on a special lock being fitted to it by
Hubbs’s. Philip, as I say, placed the package at the bottom of the
trunk. It was stolen just a few hours before reaching New York. A
rigorous search of the whole ship was made, but without result.
The bonds seemed literally to have vanished into thin air.”

Poirot made a grimace.

“But they did not vanish absolutely, since I gather that they were
sold in small parcels within half an hour of the docking of the
_Olympia_! Well, undoubtedly the next thing is for me to see Mr.
Ridgeway.”

“I was about to suggest that you should lunch with me at the
‘Cheshire Cheese.’ Philip will be there. He is meeting me, but does
not yet know that I have been consulting you on his behalf.”

We agreed to this suggestion readily enough, and drove there in a
taxi.

Mr. Philip Ridgeway was there before us, and looked somewhat
surprised to see his fiancée arriving with two complete strangers.
He was a nice-looking young fellow, tall and spruce, with a touch
of greying hair at the temples, though he could not have been much
over thirty.

Miss Farquhar went up to him and laid her hand on his arm.

“You must forgive my acting without consulting you, Philip,” she
said. “Let me introduce you to Monsieur Hercule Poirot, of whom
you must often have heard, and his friend, Captain Hastings.”

Ridgeway looked very astonished.

“Of course I have heard of you, Monsieur Poirot,” he said, as he
shook hands. “But I had no idea that Esmée was thinking of
consulting you about my—our trouble.”

“I was afraid you would not let me do it, Philip,” said Miss
Farquhar meekly.

“So you took care to be on the safe side,” he observed, with a
smile. “I hope Monsieur Poirot will be able to throw some light on
this extraordinary puzzle, for I confess frankly that I am nearly
out of my mind with worry and anxiety about it.”

Indeed, his face looked drawn and haggard and showed only too
clearly the strain under which he was labouring.

“Well, well,” said Poirot. “Let us lunch, and over lunch we will
put our heads together and see what can be done. I want to hear
Mr. Ridgeway’s story from his own lips.”

Whilst we discussed the excellent steak and kidney pudding of the
establishment, Philip Ridgeway narrated the circumstances leading
to the disappearance of the bonds. His story agreed with that of
Miss Farquhar in every particular. When he had finished, Poirot
took up the thread with a question.

“What exactly led you to discover that the bonds had been stolen,
Mr. Ridgeway?”

He laughed rather bitterly.

“The thing stared me in the face, Monsieur Poirot. I couldn’t have
missed it. My cabin trunk was half out from under the bunk and all
scratched and cut about where they’d tried to force the lock.”

“But I understood that it had been opened with a key?”

“That’s so. They tried to force it, but couldn’t. And, in the end,
they must have got it unlocked somehow or other.”

“Curious,” said Poirot, his eyes beginning to flicker with the
green light I knew so well. “Very curious! They waste much, much
time trying to prise it open, and then—_sapristi!_ they find that
they have the key all the time—for each of Hubbs’s locks are
unique.”

“That’s just why they couldn’t have had the key. It never left me
day or night.”

“You are sure of that?”

“I can swear to it, and besides, if they had had the key or a
duplicate, why should they waste time trying to force an obviously
unforceable lock?”

“Ah! there is exactly the question we are asking ourselves! I
venture to prophesy that the solution, if we ever find it, will
hinge on that curious fact. I beg of you not to assault me if I
ask you one more question: _Are you perfectly certain you did not
leave the trunk unlocked?_”

Philip Ridgeway merely looked at him, and Poirot gesticulated
apologetically.

“Ah, but these things can happen, I assure you! Very well, the
bonds were stolen from the trunk. What did the thief do with them?
How did he manage to get ashore with them?”

“Ah!” cried Ridgeway. “That’s just it. How? Word was passed to the
Customs authorities, and every soul that left the ship was gone
over with a toothcomb!”

“And the bonds, I gather, made a bulky package?”

“Certainly they did. They could hardly have been hidden on board—and
anyway we know they weren’t because they were offered for sale
within half an hour of the _Olympia’s_ arrival, long before I got
the cables going and the numbers sent out. One broker swears he
bought some of them even before the _Olympia_ got in. But you can’t
send bonds by wireless.”

“Not by wireless, but did any tug come alongside?”

“Only the official ones, and that was after the alarm was given
when every one was on the look-out. I was watching out myself for
their being passed over to some one that way. My God, Monsieur
Poirot, this thing will drive me mad! People are beginning to say
I stole them myself.”

“But you also were searched on landing, weren’t you?” asked Poirot
gently.

“Yes.”

The young man stared at him in a puzzled manner.

“You do not catch my meaning, I see,” said Poirot, smiling
enigmatically. “Now I should like to make a few inquiries at the
Bank.”

Ridgeway produced a card and scribbled a few words on it.

“Send this in and my uncle will see you at once.”

Poirot thanked him, bade farewell to Miss Farquhar, and together
we started out for Threadneedle Street and the head office of the
London and Scottish Bank. On production of Ridgeway’s card, we were
led through the labyrinth of counters and desks, skirting paying-in
clerks and paying-out clerks and up to a small office on the first
floor where the joint general managers received us. They were two
grave gentlemen, who had grown grey in the service of the Bank.
Mr. Vavasour had a short white beard, Mr. Shaw was clean shaven.

“I understand you are strictly a private inquiry agent?” said Mr.
Vavasour. “Quite so, quite so. We have, of course, placed ourselves
in the hands of Scotland Yard. Inspector McNeil has charge of the
case. A very able officer, I believe.”

“I am sure of it,” said Poirot politely. “You will permit a few
questions, on your nephew’s behalf? About this lock, who ordered
it from Hubbs’s?”

“I ordered it myself,” said Mr. Shaw. “I would not trust to any
clerk in the matter. As to the keys, Mr. Ridgeway had one, and the
other two are held by my colleague and myself.”

“And no clerk has had access to them?”

Mr. Shaw turned inquiringly to Mr. Vavasour. “I think I am correct
in saying that they have remained in the safe where we placed them
on the 23rd,” said Mr. Vavasour. “My colleague was unfortunately
taken ill a fortnight ago—in fact on the very day that Philip left
us. He has only just recovered.”

“Severe bronchitis is no joke to a man of my age,” said Mr. Shaw
ruefully. “But I am afraid Mr. Vavasour has suffered from the hard
work entailed by my absence, especially with this unexpected worry
coming on top of everything.”

Poirot asked a few more questions. I judged that he was endeavouring
to gauge the exact amount of intimacy between uncle and nephew.
Mr. Vavasour’s answers were brief and punctilious. His nephew was
a trusted official of the Bank, and had no debts or money
difficulties that he knew of. He had been entrusted with similar
missions in the past. Finally we were politely bowed out.

“I am disappointed,” said Poirot, as we emerged into the street.

“You hoped to discover more? They are such stodgy old men.”

“It is not their stodginess which disappoints me, _mon ami_. I do
not expect to find in a Bank manager a ‘keen financier with an
eagle glance’ as your favourite works of fiction put it. No, I am
disappointed in the case—it is too easy!”

“Easy?”

“Yes, do you not find it almost childishly simple?”

“You know who stole the bonds?”

“I do.”

“But then—we must—why——”

“Do not confuse and fluster yourself, Hastings. We are not going
to do anything at present.”

“But why? What are you waiting for?”

“For the _Olympia_. She is due on her return trip from New York on
Tuesday.”

“But if you know who stole the bonds, why wait? He may escape.”

“To a South Sea island where there is no extradition? No, _mon
ami_, he would find life very uncongenial there. As to why I
wait—_eh bien_ to the intelligence of Hercule Poirot the case is
perfectly clear, but for the benefit of others, not so greatly
gifted by the good God—the Inspector McNeil, for instance—it would
be as well to make a few inquiries to establish the facts. One must
have consideration for those less gifted than oneself.”

“Good Lord, Poirot! Do you know, I’d give a considerable sum of
money to see you make a thorough ass of yourself—just for once.
You’re so confoundedly conceited!”

“Do not enrage yourself, Hastings. In verity, I observe that there
are times when you almost detest me! Alas, I suffer the penalties
of greatness!”

The little man puffed out his chest, and sighed so comically that
I was forced to laugh.

Tuesday saw us speeding to Liverpool in a first-class carriage of
the L. & N.W.R. Poirot had obstinately refused to enlighten me as
to his suspicions—or certainties. He contented himself with
expressing surprise that I, too, was not equally _au fait_ with
the situation. I disdained to argue, and entrenched my curiosity
behind a rampart of pretended indifference.

Once arrived at the quay alongside which lay the big transatlantic
liner, Poirot became brisk and alert. Our proceedings consisted in
interviewing four successive stewards and inquiring after a friend
of Poirot’s who had crossed to New York on the 23rd.

“An elderly gentleman, wearing glasses. A great invalid, hardly
moved out of his cabin.”

The description appeared to tally with one Mr. Ventnor who had
occupied the cabin C 24 which was next to that of Philip Ridgeway.
Although unable to see how Poirot had deduced Mr. Ventnor’s
existence and personal appearance, I was keenly excited.

“Tell me,” I cried, “was this gentleman one of the first to land
when you got to New York?” The steward shook his head.

“No, indeed, sir, he was one of the last off the boat.”

I retired crestfallen, and observed Poirot grinning at me. He
thanked the steward, a note changed hands, and we took our
departure.

“It’s all very well,” I remarked heatedly, “but that last answer
must have damped your precious theory, grin as you please!”

“As usual, you see nothing, Hastings. That last answer is, on the
contrary, the coping-stone of my theory.”

I flung up my hands in despair.

“I give it up.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


When we were in the train, speeding towards London, Poirot wrote
busily for a few minutes, sealing up the result in an envelope.

“This is for the good Inspector McNeil. We will leave it at Scotland
Yard in passing, and then to the Rendezvous Restaurant, where I
have asked Miss Esmée Farquhar to do us the honour of dining with
us.”

“What about Ridgeway?”

“What about him?” asked Poirot with a twinkle.

“Why, you surely don’t think—you can’t——”

“The habit of incoherence is growing upon you, Hastings. As a
matter of fact I _did_ think. If Ridgeway had been the thief—which
was perfectly possible—the case would have been charming; a piece
of neat methodical work.”

“But not so charming for Miss Farquhar.”

“Possibly you are right. Therefore all is for the best. Now,
Hastings, let us review the case. I can see that you are dying to
do so. The sealed package is removed from the trunk and vanishes,
as Miss Farquhar puts it, into thin air. We will dismiss the thin
air theory, which is not practicable at the present stage of
science, and consider what is likely to have become of it. Every
one asserts the incredibility of its being smuggled ashore——”

“Yes, but we know——”

“_You_ may know, Hastings. I do not. I take the view that, since
it seemed incredible, it _was_ incredible. Two possibilities
remain: it was hidden on board—also rather difficult—or it was
thrown overboard.”

“With a cork on it, do you mean?”

“Without a cork.”

I stared.

“But if the bonds were thrown overboard, they couldn’t have been
sold in New York.”

“I admire your logical mind, Hastings. The bonds were sold in New
York, therefore they were not thrown overboard. You see where that
leads us?”

“Where we were when we started.”

“_Jamais de la vie!_ If the package was thrown overboard, and the
bonds were sold in New York, the package could not have contained
the bonds. Is there any evidence that the package _did_ contain
the bonds? Remember, Mr. Ridgeway never opened it from the time it
was placed in his hands in London.”

“Yes, but then——”

Poirot waved an impatient hand.

“Permit me to continue. The last moment that the bonds are seen as
bonds is in the office of the London and Scottish Bank on the
morning of the 23rd. They reappear in New York half an hour after
the _Olympia_ gets in, and according to one man, whom nobody
listens to, actually _before_ she gets in. Supposing then, that
they have never been on the _Olympia_ at all? Is there any other
way they could get to New York? Yes. The _Gigantic_ leaves
Southampton on the same day as the _Olympia_, and she holds the
record for the Atlantic. Mailed by the _Gigantic_, the bonds would
be in New York the day before the _Olympia_ arrived. All is clear,
the case begins to explain itself. The sealed packet is only a
dummy, and the moment of its substitution must be in the office in
the Bank. It would be an easy matter for any of the three men
present to have prepared a duplicate package which could be
substituted for the genuine one. _Très bien_, the bonds are mailed
to a confederate in New York, with instructions to sell as soon as
the _Olympia_ is in, but some one must travel on the _Olympia_ to
engineer the supposed moment of the robbery.”

“But why?”

“Because if Ridgeway merely opens the packet and finds it a dummy,
suspicion flies at once to London. No, the man on board in the
cabin next door does his work, pretends to force the lock in an
obvious manner so as to draw immediate attention to the theft,
really unlocks the trunk with a duplicate key, throws the package
overboard and waits until the last to leave the boat. Naturally he
wears glasses to conceal his eyes, and is an invalid since he does
not want to run the risk of meeting Ridgeway. He steps ashore in
New York and returns by the first boat available.”

“But who—which was he?”

“The man who had a duplicate key, the man who ordered the lock,
the man who has _not_ been severely ill with bronchitis at his home
in the country—_enfin_, that ‘stodgy’ old man, Mr. Shaw! There are
criminals in high places sometimes, my friend. Ah, here we are.
Mademoiselle, I have succeeded! You permit?”

And, beaming, Poirot kissed the astonished girl lightly on either
cheek!




  VI


  The Adventure of the Egyptian Tomb


I have always considered that one of the most thrilling and dramatic
of the many adventures I have shared with Poirot was that of our
investigation into the strange series of deaths which followed upon
the discovery and opening of the Tomb of King Men-her-Ra.

Hard upon the discovery of the Tomb of Tut-ankh-Amen by Lord
Carnarvon, Sir John Willard and Mr. Bleibner of New York, pursuing
their excavations not far from Cairo, in the vicinity of the
Pyramids of Gizeh, came unexpectedly on a series of funeral
chambers. The greatest interest was aroused by their discovery.
The Tomb appeared to be that of King Men-her-Ra, one of those
shadowy kings of the Eighth Dynasty, when the Old Kingdom was
falling to decay. Little was known about this period, and the
discoveries were fully reported in the newspapers.

An event soon occurred which took a profound hold on the public
mind. Sir John Willard died quite suddenly of heart failure.

The more sensational newspapers immediately took the opportunity
of reviving all the old superstitious stories connected with the
ill luck of certain Egyptian treasures. The unlucky Mummy at the
British Museum, that hoary old chestnut, was dragged out with fresh
zest, was quietly denied by the Museum, but nevertheless enjoyed
all its usual vogue.

A fortnight later Mr. Bleibner died of acute blood poisoning, and
a few days afterwards a nephew of his shot himself in New York.
The “Curse of Men-her-Ra” was the talk of the day, and the magic
power of dead and gone Egypt was exalted to a fetish point.

It was then that Poirot received a brief note from Lady Willard,
widow of the dead archaeologist, asking him to go and see her at
her house in Kensington Square. I accompanied him.

Lady Willard was a tall, thin woman, dressed in deep mourning. Her
haggard face bore eloquent testimony to her recent grief.

“It is kind of you to have come so promptly, Monsieur Poirot.”

“I am at your service, Lady Willard. You wished to consult me?”

“You are, I am aware, a detective, but it is not only as a detective
that I wish to consult you. You are a man of original views, I
know, you have imagination, experience of the world, tell me,
Monsieur Poirot, what are your views on the supernatural?”

Poirot hesitated for a moment before he replied. He seemed to be
considering. Finally he said:

“Let us not misunderstand each other, Lady Willard. It is not a
general question that you are asking me there. It has a personal
application, has it not? You are referring obliquely to the death
of your late husband?”

“That is so,” she admitted.

“You want me to investigate the circumstances of his death?”

“I want you to ascertain for me exactly how much is newspaper
chatter, and how much may be said to be founded on fact? Three
deaths, Monsieur Poirot—each one explicable taken by itself, but
taken together surely an almost unbelievable coincidence, and all
within a month of the opening of the tomb! It may be mere
superstition, it may be some potent curse from the past that
operates in ways undreamed of by modern science. The fact
remains—three deaths! And I am afraid, Monsieur Poirot, horribly
afraid. It may not yet be the end.”

“For whom do you fear?”

“For my son. When the news of my husband’s death came I was ill.
My son, who has just come down from Oxford, went out there. He
brought the—the body home, but now he has gone out again, in spite
of my prayers and entreaties. He is so fascinated by the work that
he intends to take his father’s place and carry on the system of
excavations. You may think me a foolish, credulous woman, but,
Monsieur Poirot, I am afraid. Supposing that the spirit of the dead
King is not yet appeased? Perhaps to you I seem to be talking
nonsense——”

“No, indeed, Lady Willard,” said Poirot quickly. “I, too, believe
in the force of superstition, one of the greatest forces the world
has ever known.”

I looked at him in surprise. I should never have credited Poirot
with being superstitious. But the little man was obviously in
earnest.

“What you really demand is that I shall protect your son? I will
do my utmost to keep him from harm.”

“Yes, in the ordinary way, but against an occult influence?”

“In volumes of the Middle Ages, Lady Willard, you will find many
ways of counteracting black magic. Perhaps they knew more than we
moderns with all our boasted science. Now let us come to facts,
that I may have guidance. Your husband had always been a devoted
Egyptologist, hadn’t he?”

“Yes, from his youth upwards. He was one of the greatest living
authorities upon the subject.”

“But Mr. Bleibner, I understand, was more or less of an amateur?”

“Oh, quite. He was a very wealthy man who dabbled freely in any
subject that happened to take his fancy. My husband managed to
interest him in Egyptology, and it was his money that was so useful
in financing the expedition.”

“And the nephew? What do you know of his tastes? Was he with the
party at all?”

“I do not think so. In fact I never knew of his existence till I
read of his death in the paper, I do not think he and Mr. Bleibner
can have been at all intimate. He never spoke of having any
relations.”

“Who are the other members of the party?”

“Well, there is Dr. Tosswill, a minor official connected with the
British Museum; Mr. Schneider of the Metropolitan Museum in New
York; a young American secretary; Dr. Ames, who accompanies the
expedition in his professional capacity; and Hassan, my husband’s
devoted native servant.”

“Do you remember the name of the American secretary?”

“Harper, I think, but I cannot be sure. He had not been with Mr.
Bleibner very long, I know. He was a very pleasant young fellow.”

“Thank you, Lady Willard.”

“If there is anything else——?”

“For the moment, nothing. Leave it now in my hands, and be assured
that I will do all that is humanly possible to protect your son.”

They were not exactly reassuring words, and I observed Lady Willard
wince as he uttered them. Yet, at the same time, the fact that he
had not pooh-poohed her fears seemed in itself to be a relief to
her.

For my part I had never before suspected that Poirot had so deep
a vein of superstition in his nature. I tackled him on the subject
as we went homewards. His manner was grave and earnest.

“But yes, Hastings. I believe in these things. You must not
underrate the force of superstition.”

“What are we going to do about it?”

“_Toujours pratique_, the good Hastings! _Eh bien_, to begin with
we are going to cable to New York for fuller details of young Mr.
Bleibner’s death.”

He duly sent off his cable. The reply was full and precise. Young
Rupert Bleibner had been in low water for several years. He had
been a beach-comber and a remittance man in several South Sea
islands, but had returned to New York two years ago, where he had
rapidly sunk lower and lower. The most significant thing, to my
mind, was that he had recently managed to borrow enough money to
take him to Egypt. “I’ve a good friend there I can borrow from,”
he had declared. Here, however, his plans had gone awry. He had
returned to New York cursing his skinflint of an uncle who cared
more for the bones of dead and gone kings than his own flesh and
blood. It was during his sojourn in Egypt that the death of Sir
John Willard occurred. Rupert had plunged once more into his life
of dissipation in New York, and then, without warning, he had
committed suicide, leaving behind him a letter which contained some
curious phrases. It seemed written in a sudden fit of remorse. He
referred to himself as a leper and an outcast, and the letter ended
by declaring that such as he were better dead.

A shadowy theory leapt into my brain. I had never really believed
in the vengeance of a long dead Egyptian king. I saw here a more
modern crime. Supposing this young man had decided to do away with
his uncle—preferably by poison. By mistake, Sir John Willard
receives the fatal dose. The young man returns to New York, haunted
by his crime. The news of his uncle’s death reaches him. He realizes
how unnecessary his crime has been, and stricken with remorse takes
his own life.

I outlined my solution to Poirot. He was interested.

“It is ingenious what you have thought of there—decidedly it is
ingenious. It may even be true. But you leave out of count the
fatal influence of the Tomb.”

I shrugged my shoulders.

“You still think that has something to do with it?”

“So much so, _mon ami_, that we start for Egypt to-morrow.”

“What?” I cried, astonished.

“I have said it.” An expression of conscious heroism spread over
Poirot’s face. Then he groaned. “But, oh,” he lamented, “the sea!
The hateful sea!”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


It was a week later. Beneath our feet was the golden sand of the
desert. The hot sun poured down overhead. Poirot, the picture of
misery, wilted by my side. The little man was not a good traveller.
Our four days’ voyage from Marseilles had been one long agony to
him. He had landed at Alexandria the wraith of his former self,
even his usual neatness had deserted him. We had arrived in Cairo
and had driven out at once to the Mena House Hotel, right in the
shadow of the Pyramids.

The charm of Egypt had laid hold of me. Not so Poirot. Dressed
precisely the same as in London, he carried a small clothes-brush
in his pocket and waged an unceasing war on the dust which
accumulated on his dark apparel.

“And my boots,” he wailed. “Regard them, Hastings. My boots, of
the neat patent leather, usually so smart and shining. See, the
sand is inside them, which is painful, and outside them, which
outrages the eyesight. Also the heat, it causes my moustaches to
become limp—but limp!”

“Look at the Sphinx,” I urged. “Even I can feel the mystery and
the charm it exhales.”

Poirot looked at it discontentedly.

“It has not the air happy,” he declared. “How could it, half-buried
in sand in that untidy fashion. Ah, this cursed sand!”

“Come, now, there’s a lot of sand in Belgium,” I reminded him,
mindful of a holiday spent at Knocke-sur-mer in the midst of “_les
dunes impeccables_” as the guide-book had phrased it.

“Not in Brussels,” declared Poirot. He gazed at the Pyramids
thoughtfully. “It is true that they, at least, are of a shape solid
and geometrical, but their surface is of an unevenness most
unpleasing. And the palm-trees I like them not. Not even do they
plant them in rows!”

I cut short his lamentations, by suggesting that we should start
for the camp. We were to ride there on camels, and the beasts were
patiently kneeling, waiting for us to mount, in charge of several
picturesque boys headed by a voluble dragoman.

I pass over the spectacle of Poirot on a camel. He started by
groans and lamentations and ended by shrieks, gesticulations and
invocations to the Virgin Mary and every Saint in the calendar. In
the end, he descended ignominiously and finished the journey on a
diminutive donkey. I must admit that a trotting camel is no joke
for the amateur. I was stiff for several days.

At last we neared the scene of the excavations. A sunburnt man with
a grey beard, in white clothes and wearing a helmet, came to meet
us.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings? We received your cable. I’m
sorry that there was no one to meet you in Cairo. An unforeseen
event occurred which completely disorganized our plans.”

Poirot paled. His hand, which had stolen to his clothes-brush,
stayed its course.

“Not another death?” he breathed.

“Yes.”

“Sir Guy Willard?” I cried.

“No, Captain Hastings. My American colleague, Mr. Schneider.”

“And the cause?” demanded Poirot.

“Tetanus.”

I blanched. All around me I seemed to feel an atmosphere of evil,
subtle and menacing. A horrible thought flashed across me. Supposing
I were the next?

“_Mon Dieu_,” said Poirot, in a very low voice, “I do not understand
this. It is horrible. Tell me, monsieur, there is no doubt that it
was tetanus?”

“I believe not. But Dr. Ames will tell you more than I can do.”

“Ah, of course, you are not the doctor.”

“My name is Tosswill.”

This, then, was the British expert described by Lady Willard as
being a minor official at the British Museum. There was something
at once grave and steadfast about him that took my fancy.

“If you will come with me,” continued Dr. Tosswill, “I will take
you to Sir Guy Willard. He was most anxious to be informed as soon
as you should arrive.”

We were taken across the camp to a large tent. Dr. Tosswill lifted
up the flap and we entered. Three men were sitting inside.

“Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings have arrived, Sir Guy,” said
Tosswill.

The youngest of the three men jumped up and came forward to greet
us. There was a certain impulsiveness in his manner which reminded
me of his mother. He was not nearly so sunburnt as the others, and
that fact, coupled with a certain haggardness round the eyes, made
him look older than his twenty-two years. He was clearly endeavouring
to bear up under a severe mental strain.

He introduced his two companions, Dr. Ames, a capable looking man
of thirty odd, with a touch of greying hair at the temples, and
Mr. Harper, the secretary, a pleasant lean young man wearing the
national insignia of horn-rimmed spectacles.

After a few minutes’ desultory conversation the latter went out,
and Dr. Tosswill followed him. We were left alone with Sir Guy and
Dr. Ames.

“Please ask any questions you want to ask, Monsieur Poirot,” said
Willard. “We are utterly dumbfounded at this strange series of
disasters, but it isn’t—it can’t be, anything but coincidence.”

There was a nervousness about his manner which rather belied the
words. I saw that Poirot was studying him keenly.

“Your heart is really in this work, Sir Guy?”

“Rather. No matter what happens, or what comes of it, the work is
going on. Make up your mind to that.”

Poirot wheeled round on the other.

“What have you to say to that, _monsieur le docteur_?”

“Well,” drawled the doctor, “I’m not for quitting myself.”

Poirot made one of those expressive grimaces of his.

“Then, _évidemment_, we must find out just how we stand. When did
Mr. Schneider’s death take place?”

“Three days ago.”

“You are sure it was tetanus?”

“Dead sure.”

“It couldn’t have been a case of strychnine poisoning, for
instance?”

“No, Monsieur Poirot. I see what you’re getting at. But it was a
clear case of tetanus.”

“Did you not inject anti-serum?”

“Certainly we did,” said the doctor dryly. “Every conceivable thing
that could be done was tried.”

“Had you the anti-serum with you?”

“No. We procured it from Cairo.”

“Have there been any other cases of tetanus in the camp?”

“No, not one.”

“Are you certain that the death of Mr. Bleibner was not due to
tetanus?”

“Absolutely plumb certain. He had a scratch upon his thumb which
became poisoned, and septicæmia set in. It sounds pretty much the
same to a layman, I dare say, but the two things are entirely
different.”

“Then we have four deaths—all totally dissimilar, one heart failure,
one blood poisoning, one suicide and one tetanus.”

“Exactly, Monsieur Poirot.”

“Are you certain that there is nothing which might link the four
together?”

“I don’t quite understand you?”

“I will put it plainly. Was any act committed by those four men
which might seem to denote disrespect to the spirit of Men-her-Ra?”

The doctor gazed at Poirot in astonishment.

“You’re talking through your hat, Monsieur Poirot. Surely you’ve
not been guyed into believing all that fool talk?”

“Absolute nonsense,” muttered Willard angrily.

Poirot remained placidly immovable, blinking a little out of his
green cat’s eyes.

“So you do not believe it, _monsieur le docteur_?”

“No, sir, I do not,” declared the doctor emphatically. “I am a
scientific man, and I believe only what science teaches.”

“Was there no science then in Ancient Egypt?” asked Poirot softly.
He did not wait for a reply, and indeed Dr. Ames seemed rather at
a loss for the moment. “No, no, do not answer me, but tell me this.
What do the native workmen think?”

“I guess,” said Dr. Ames, “that, where white folk lose their heads,
natives aren’t going to be far behind. I’ll admit that they’re
getting what you might call scared—but they’ve no cause to be.”

“I wonder,” said Poirot non-committally.

Sir Guy leant forward.

“Surely,” he cried incredulously, “you cannot believe in—oh, but
the thing’s absurd! You can know nothing of Ancient Egypt if you
think that.”

For answer Poirot produced a little book from his pocket—an ancient
tattered volume. As he held it out I saw its title, _The Magic of
the Egyptians and Chaldeans_. Then, wheeling round, he strode out
of the tent. The doctor stared at me.

“What is his little idea?”

The phrase, so familiar on Poirot’s lips, made me smile as it came
from another.

“I don’t know exactly,” I confessed. “He’s got some plan of
exorcizing the evil spirits, I believe.”

I went in search of Poirot, and found him talking to the lean-faced
young man who had been the late Mr. Bleibner’s secretary.

“No,” Mr. Harper was saying, “I’ve only been six months with the
expedition. Yes, I knew Mr. Bleibner’s affairs pretty well.”

“Can you recount to me anything concerning his nephew?”

“He turned up here one day, not a bad-looking fellow. I’d never
met him before, but some of the others had—Ames, I think, and
Schneider. The old man wasn’t at all pleased to see him. They were
at it in no time, hammer and tongs. ‘Not a cent,’ the old man
shouted. ‘Not one cent now or when I’m dead. I intend to leave my
money to the furtherance of my life’s work. I’ve been talking it
over with Mr. Schneider to-day.’ And a bit more of the same. Young
Bleibner lit out for Cairo right away.”

“Was he in perfectly good health at the time?”

“The old man?”

“No, the young one.”

“I believe he did mention there was something wrong with him. But
it couldn’t have been anything serious, or I should have remembered.”

“One thing more, has Mr. Bleibner left a will?”

“So far as we know, he has not.”

“Are you remaining with the expedition, Mr. Harper?”

“No, sir, I am not. I’m for New York as soon as I can square up
things here. You may laugh if you like, but I’m not going to be
this blasted old Men-her-Ra’s next victim. He’ll get me if I stop
here.”

The young man wiped the perspiration from his brow.

Poirot turned away. Over his shoulder he said with a peculiar
smile:

“Remember, he got one of his victims in New York.”

“Oh, hell!” said Mr. Harper forcibly.

“That young man is nervous,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “He is on
the edge, but absolutely on the edge.”

I glanced at Poirot curiously, but his enigmatical smile told me
nothing. In company with Sir Guy Willard and Dr. Tosswill we were
taken round the excavations. The principal finds had been removed
to Cairo, but some of the tomb furniture was extremely interesting.
The enthusiasm of the young baronet was obvious, but I fancied that
I detected a shade of nervousness in his manner as though he could
not quite escape from the feeling of menace in the air. As we
entered the tent which had been assigned to us, for a wash before
joining the evening meal, a tall dark figure in white robes stood
aside to let us pass with a graceful gesture and a murmured greeting
in Arabic. Poirot stopped.

“You are Hassan, the late Sir John Willard’s servant?”

“I served my Lord Sir John, now I serve his son.” He took a step
nearer to us and lowered his voice. “You are a wise one, they say,
learned in dealing with evil spirits. Let the young master depart
from here. There is evil in the air around us.”

And with an abrupt gesture, not waiting for a reply, he strode
away.

“Evil in the air,” muttered Poirot. “Yes, I feel it.”

Our meal was hardly a cheerful one. The floor was left to Dr.
Tosswill, who discoursed at length upon Egyptian antiquities. Just
as we were preparing to retire to rest, Sir Guy caught Poirot by
the arm and pointed. A shadowy figure was moving amidst the tents.
It was no human one: I recognized distinctly the dog-headed figure
I had seen carved on the walls of the tomb.

My blood literally froze at the sight.

“_Mon Dieu!_” murmured Poirot, crossing himself vigorously. “Anubis,
the jackal-headed, the god of departing souls.”

“Some one is hoaxing us,” cried Dr. Tosswill, rising indignantly
to his feet.

“It went into your tent, Harper,” muttered Sir Guy, his face
dreadfully pale.

“No,” said Poirot, shaking his head, “into that of the Dr. Ames.”

The doctor stared at him incredulously; then, repeating Dr.
Tosswill’s words, he cried:

“Some one is hoaxing us. Come, we’ll soon catch the fellow.”

He dashed energetically in pursuit of the shadowy apparition. I
followed him, but, search as we would, we could find no trace of
any living soul having passed that way. We returned, somewhat
disturbed in mind, to find Poirot taking energetic measures, in
his own way, to ensure his personal safety. He was busily
surrounding our tent with various diagrams and inscriptions which
he was drawing in the sand. I recognized the five-pointed star or
Pentagon many times repeated. As was his wont, Poirot was at the
same time delivering an impromptu lecture on witchcraft and magic
in general, White Magic as opposed to Black, with various references
to the Ka and the Book of the Dead thrown in.

It appeared to excite the liveliest contempt in Dr. Tosswill, who
drew me aside, literally snorting with rage.

“Balderdash, sir,” he exclaimed angrily. “Pure balderdash. The
man’s an impostor. He doesn’t know the difference between the
superstitions of the Middle Ages and the beliefs of Ancient Egypt.
Never have I heard such a hotch-potch of ignorance and credulity.”

I calmed the excited expert, and joined Poirot in the tent. My
little friend was beaming cheerfully.

“We can now sleep in peace,” he declared happily. “And I can do
with some sleep. My head, it aches abominably. Ah, for a good
_tisane_!”

As though in answer to prayer, the flap of the tent was lifted and
Hassan appeared, bearing a steaming cup which he offered to Poirot.
It proved to be camomile tea, a beverage of which he is inordinately
fond. Having thanked Hassan and refused his offer of another cup
for myself, we were left alone once more. I stood at the door of
the tent some time after undressing, looking out over the desert.

“A wonderful place,” I said aloud, “and a wonderful work. I can
feel the fascination. This desert life, this probing into the heart
of a vanished civilization. Surely, Poirot, you, too, must feel
the charm?”

I got no answer, and I turned, a little annoyed. My annoyance was
quickly changed to concern. Poirot was lying back across the rude
couch, his face horribly convulsed. Beside him was the empty cup.
I rushed to his side, then dashed out and across the camp to Dr.
Ames’s tent.

“Dr. Ames!” I cried. “Come at once.”

“What’s the matter?” said the doctor, appearing in pyjamas.

“My friend. He’s ill. Dying. The camomile tea. Don’t let Hassan
leave the camp.”

Like a flash the doctor ran to our tent. Poirot was lying as I left
him.

“Extraordinary,” cried Ames. “Looks like a seizure—or—what did you
say about something he drank?” He picked up the empty cup.

“Only I did not drink it!” said a placid voice.

We turned in amazement. Poirot was sitting up on the bed. He was
smiling.

“No,” he said gently. “I did not drink it. While my good friend
Hastings was apostrophizing the night, I took the opportunity of
pouring it, not down my throat, but into a little bottle. That
little bottle will go to the analytical chemist. No”—as the doctor
made a sudden movement—“as a sensible man, you will understand that
violence will be of no avail. During Hastings’ brief absence to
fetch you, I have had time to put the bottle in safe keeping. Ah,
quick, Hastings, hold him!”

I misunderstood Poirot’s anxiety. Eager to save my friend, I flung
myself in front of him. But the doctor’s swift movement had another
meaning. His hand went to his mouth, a smell of bitter almonds
filled the air, and he swayed forward and fell.

“Another victim,” said Poirot gravely, “but the last. Perhaps it
is the best way. He has three deaths on his head.”

“Dr. Ames?” I cried, stupefied. “But I thought you believed in some
occult influence?”

“You misunderstood me, Hastings. What I meant was that I believe
in the terrific force of superstition. Once get it firmly
established that a series of deaths are supernatural, and you might
almost stab a man in broad daylight, and it would still be put down
to the curse, so strongly is the instinct of the supernatural
implanted in the human race. I suspected from the first that a man
was taking advantage of that instinct. The idea came to him, I
imagine, with the death of Sir John Willard. A fury of superstition
arose at once. As far as I could see, nobody could derive any
particular profit from Sir John’s death. Mr. Bleibner was a
different case. He was a man of great wealth. The information I
received from New York contained several suggestive points. To
begin with, young Bleibner was reported to have said he had a good
friend in Egypt from whom he could borrow. It was tacitly understood
that he meant his uncle, but it seemed to me that in that case he
would have said so outright. The words suggest some boon companion
of his own. Another thing, he scraped up enough money to take him
to Egypt, his uncle refused outright to advance him a penny, yet
he was able to pay the return passage to New York. Some one must
have lent him the money.”

“All that was very thin,” I objected.

“But there was more. Hastings, there occur often enough words
spoken metaphorically which are taken literally. The opposite can
happen too. In this case, words which were meant literally were
taken metaphorically. Young Bleibner wrote plainly enough: ‘I am
a leper,’ but nobody realized that he shot himself because he
believed that he had contracted the dread disease of leprosy.”

“What?” I ejaculated.

“It was the clever invention of a diabolical mind. Young Bleibner
was suffering from some minor skin trouble, he had lived in the
South Sea Islands, where the disease is common enough. Ames was a
former friend of his, and a well-known medical man, he would never
dream of doubting his word. When I arrived here, my suspicions were
divided between Harper and Dr. Ames, but I soon realized that only
the doctor could have perpetrated and concealed the crimes, and I
learnt from Harper that he was previously acquainted with young
Bleibner. Doubtless the latter at some time or another had made a
will or had insured his life in favour of the doctor. The latter
saw his chance of acquiring wealth. It was easy for him to inoculate
Mr. Bleibner with the deadly germs. Then the nephew, overcome with
despair at the dread news his friend had conveyed to him, shot
himself. Mr. Bleibner, whatever his intentions, had made no will.
His fortune would pass to his nephew and from him to the doctor.”

“And Mr. Schneider?”

“We cannot be sure. He knew young Bleibner too, remember, and may
have suspected something, or, again, the doctor may have thought
that a further death motiveless and purposeless would strengthen
the coils of superstition. Furthermore, I will tell you an
interesting psychological fact, Hastings. A murderer has always a
strong desire to repeat his successful crime, the performance of
it grows upon him. Hence my fears for young Willard. The figure of
Anubis you saw to-night was Hassan, dressed up by my orders. I
wanted to see if I could frighten the doctor. But it would take
more than the supernatural to frighten him. I could see that he
was not entirely taken in by my pretences of belief in the occult.
The little comedy I played for him did not deceive him. I suspected
that he would endeavour to make me the next victim. Ah, but in
spite of _la mer maudite_, the heat abominable, and the annoyances
of the sand, the little grey cells still functioned!”

Poirot proved to be perfectly right in his premises. Young Bleibner,
some years ago, in a fit of drunken merriment, had made a jocular
will, leaving “my cigarette case you admire so much and everything
else of which I die possessed which will be principally debts to
my good friend Robert Ames who once saved my life from drowning.”

The case was hushed up as far as possible, and, to this day, people
talk of the remarkable series of deaths in connection with the Tomb
of Men-her-Ra as a triumphal proof of the vengeance of a bygone
king upon the desecrators of his tomb—a belief which, as Poirot
pointed out to me, is contrary to all Egyptian belief and thought.




  VII

  The Jewel Robbery at the _Grand Metropolitan_

“Poirot,” I said, “a change of air would do you good.”

“You think so, _mon ami_?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Eh—eh?” said my friend, smiling. “It is all arranged, then?”

“You will come?”

“Where do you propose to take me?”

“Brighton. As a matter of fact, a friend of mine in the City put
me on to a very good thing, and—well, I have money to burn, as the
saying goes. I think a week-end at the _Grand Metropolitan_ would
do us all the good in the world.”

“Thank you, I accept most gratefully. You have the good heart to
think of an old man. And the good heart, it is in the end worth
all the little grey cells. Yes, yes, I who speak to you am in
danger of forgetting that sometimes.”

I did not quite relish the implication. I fancy that Poirot is
sometimes a little inclined to underestimate my mental capacities.
But his pleasure was so evident that I put my slight annoyance
aside.

“Then, that’s all right,” I said hastily.

Saturday evening saw us dining at the _Grand Metropolitan_ in the
midst of a gay throng. All the world and his wife seemed to be at
Brighton. The dresses were marvellous, and the jewels—worn sometimes
with more love of display than good taste—were something magnificent.

“_Hein_, it is a sight this!” murmured Poirot. “This is the home
of the Profiteer, is it not so, Hastings?”

“Supposed to be,” I replied. “But we’ll hope they aren’t all tarred
with the Profiteering brush.”

Poirot gazed round him placidly.

“The sight of so many jewels makes me wish I had turned my brains
to crime, instead of to its detection. What a magnificent
opportunity for some thief of distinction! Regard, Hastings, that
stout woman by the pillar. She is, as you would say, plastered with
gems.”

I followed his eyes.

“Why,” I exclaimed, “it’s Mrs. Opalsen.”

“You know her?”

“Slightly. Her husband is a rich stockbroker who made a fortune in
the recent Oil boom.”

After dinner we ran across the Opalsens in the lounge, and I
introduced Poirot to them. We chatted for a few minutes, and ended
by having our coffee together.

Poirot said a few words in praise of some of the costlier gems
displayed on the lady’s ample bosom, and she brightened up at once.

“It’s a perfect hobby of mine, Mr. Poirot. I just _love_ jewellery.
Ed knows my weakness, and every time things go well he brings me
something new. You are interested in precious stones?”

“I have had a good deal to do with them one time and another,
madame. My profession has brought me into contact with some of the
most famous jewels in the world.”

He went on to narrate, with discreet pseudonyms, the story of the
historic jewels of a reigning house, and Mrs. Opalsen listened with
bated breath.

“There now!” she exclaimed, as he ended. “If it isn’t just like a
play! You know, I’ve got some pearls of my own that have a history
attached to them. I believe it’s supposed to be one of the finest
necklaces in the world—the pearls are so beautifully matched and
so perfect in colour. I declare I really must run up and get it!”

“Oh, madame,” protested Poirot, “you are too amiable. Pray do not
derange yourself!”

“Oh, but I’d like to show it to you.”

The buxom dame waddled across to the lift briskly enough. Her
husband, who had been talking to me, looked at Poirot inquiringly.

“Madame your wife is so amiable as to insist on showing me her
pearl necklace,” explained the latter.

“Oh, the pearls!” Opalsen smiled in a satisfied fashion. “Well,
they _are_ worth seeing. Cost a pretty penny too! Still, the
money’s there all right; I could get what I paid for them any
day—perhaps more. May have to, too, if things go on as they are
now. Money’s confoundedly tight in the City. All this infernal
E.P.D.” He rambled on, launching into technicalities where I could
not follow him.

He was interrupted by a small page-boy who approached and murmured
something in his ear.

“Eh—what? I’ll come at once. Not taken ill, is she? Excuse me,
gentlemen.”

He left us abruptly. Poirot leaned back and lit one of his tiny
Russian cigarettes. Then, carefully and meticulously, he arranged
the empty coffee-cups in a neat row, and beamed happily on the
result.

The minutes passed. The Opalsens did not return.

“Curious,” I remarked, at length. “I wonder when they will come
back.”

Poirot watched the ascending spirals of smoke, and then said
thoughtfully:

“They will not come back.”

“Why?”

“Because, my friend, something has happened.”

“What sort of thing? How do you know?” I asked curiously.

Poirot smiled.

“A few moments ago the manager came hurriedly out of his office
and ran upstairs. He was much agitated. The lift-boy is deep in
talk with one of the pages. The lift-bell has rung three times,
but he heeds it not. Thirdly, even the waiters are _distrait_; and
to make a waiter _distrait_——” Poirot shook his head with an air
of finality. “The affair must indeed be of the first magnitude.
Ah, it is as I thought! Here come the police.”

Two men had just entered the hotel—one in uniform, the other in
plain clothes. They spoke to a page, and were immediately ushered
upstairs. A few minutes later, the same boy descended and came up
to where we were sitting.

“Mr. Opalsen’s compliments, and would you step upstairs.”

Poirot sprang nimbly to his feet. One would have said that he
awaited the summons. I followed with no less alacrity.

The Opalsens’ apartments were situated on the first floor. After
knocking on the door, the page-boy retired, and we answered the
summons, “Come in!” A strange scene met our eyes. The room was Mrs.
Opalsen’s bedroom, and in the centre of it, lying back in an
arm-chair, was the lady herself, weeping violently. She presented
an extraordinary spectacle, with the tears making great furrows in
the powder with which her complexion was liberally coated. Mr.
Opalsen was striding up and down angrily. The two police officials
stood in the middle of the room, one with a notebook in hand. An
hotel chambermaid, looking frightened to death, stood by the
fire-place; and on the other side of the room a Frenchwoman,
obviously Mrs. Opalsen’s maid, was weeping and wringing her hands,
with an intensity of grief that rivalled that of her mistress.

Into this pandemonium stepped Poirot, neat and smiling. Immediately,
with an energy surprising in one of her bulk, Mrs. Opalsen sprang
from her chair towards him.

“There now; Ed may say what he likes, but I believe in luck, I do.
It was fated I should meet you the way I did this evening, and I’ve
a feeling that if you can’t get my pearls back for me nobody can.”

“Calm yourself, I pray of you, madame.” Poirot patted her hand
soothingly. “Reassure yourself. All will be well. Hercule Poirot
will aid you!”

Mr. Opalsen turned to the police inspector.

“There will be no objection to my—er—calling in this gentleman, I
suppose?”

“None at all, sir,” replied the man civilly, but with complete
indifference. “Perhaps now your lady’s feeling better she’ll just
let us have the facts?”

Mrs. Opalsen looked helplessly at Poirot. He led her back to her
chair.

“Seat yourself, madame, and recount to us the whole history without
agitating yourself.”

Thus abjured, Mrs. Opalsen dried her eyes gingerly, and began.

“I came upstairs after dinner to fetch my pearls for Mr. Poirot
here to see. The chambermaid and Célestine were both in the room
as usual——”

“Excuse me, madame, but what do you mean by ‘as usual’?”

Mr. Opalsen explained.

“I make it a rule that no one is to come into this room unless
Célestine, the maid, is there also. The chambermaid does the room
in the morning while Célestine is present, and comes in after
dinner to turn down the beds under the same conditions; otherwise
she never enters the room.”

“Well, as I was saying,” continued Mrs. Opalsen, “I came up. I went
to the drawer here,”—she indicated the bottom right-hand drawer of
the knee-hole dressing-table—“took out my jewel-case and unlocked
it. It seemed quite as usual—but the pearls were not there!”

The inspector had been busy with his notebook. “When had you last
seen them?” he asked.

“They were there when I went down to dinner.”

“You are sure?”

“Quite sure. I was uncertain whether to wear them or not, but in
the end I decided on the emeralds, and put them back in the
jewel-case.”

“Who locked up the jewel-case?”

“I did. I wear the key on a chain round my neck.” She held it up
as she spoke.

The inspector examined it, and shrugged his shoulders.

“The thief must have had a duplicate key. No difficult matter. The
lock is quite a simple one. What did you do after you’d locked the
jewel-case?”

“I put it back in the bottom drawer where I always keep it.”

“You didn’t lock the drawer?”

“No, I never do. My maid remains in the room till I come up, so
there’s no need.”

The inspector’s face grew graver.

“Am I to understand that the jewels were there when you went down
to dinner, and that since then _the maid has not left the room_?”

Suddenly, as though the horror of her own situation for the first
time burst upon her, Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and,
flinging herself upon Poirot, poured out a torrent of incoherent
French.

The suggestion was infamous! That she should be suspected of
robbing Madame! The police were well known to be of a stupidity
incredible! But Monsieur, who was a Frenchman—

“A Belgian,” interjected Poirot, but Célestine paid no attention
to the correction.

Monsieur would not stand by and see her falsely accused, while that
infamous chambermaid was allowed to go scot-free. She had never
liked her—a bold, red-faced thing—a born thief. She had said from
the first that she was not honest. And had kept a sharp watch over
her too, when she was doing Madame’s room! Let those idiots of
policemen search her, and if they did not find Madame’s pearls on
her it would be very surprising!

Although this harangue was uttered in rapid and virulent French,
Célestine had interlarded it with a wealth of gesture, and the
chambermaid realized at least a part of her meaning. She reddened
angrily.

“If that foreign woman’s saying I took the pearls, it’s a lie!”
she declared heatedly. “I never so much as saw them.”

“Search her!” screamed the other. “You will find it is as I say.”

“You’re a liar—do you hear?” said the chambermaid, advancing upon
her. “Stole ’em yourself, and want to put it on me. Why, I was only
in the room about three minutes before the lady come up, and then
you were sitting here the whole time, as you always do, like a cat
watching a mouse.”

The inspector looked across inquiringly at Célestine. “Is that
true? Didn’t you leave the room at all?”

“I did not actually leave her alone,” admitted Célestine reluctantly,
“but I went into my own room through the door here twice—once to
fetch a reel of cotton, and once for my scissors. She must have
done it then.”

“You wasn’t gone a minute,” retorted the chambermaid angrily. “Just
popped out and in again. I’d be glad if the police _would_ search
me. _I’ve nothing to be afraid of_.”

At this moment there was a tap at the door. The inspector went to
it. His face brightened when he saw who it was.

“Ah!” he said. “That’s rather fortunate. I sent for one of our
female searchers, and she’s just arrived. Perhaps if you wouldn’t
mind going into the room next door.”

He looked at the chambermaid, who stepped across the threshold with
a toss of her head, the searcher following her closely.

The French girl had sunk sobbing into a chair. Poirot was looking
round the room, the main features of which I have made clear by a
sketch.

[A sketch of the bedroom, adjoining maid's room, and corridor.]

“Where does that door lead?” he inquired, nodding his head towards
the one by the window.

“Into the next apartment, I believe,” said the inspector. “It’s
bolted, anyway, on this side.”

Poirot walked across to it, tried it, then drew back the bolt and
tried it again.

“And on the other side as well,” he remarked. “Well, that seems to
rule out that.”

He walked over to the windows, examining each of them in turn.

“And again—nothing. Not even a balcony outside.”

“Even if there were,” said the inspector impatiently, “I don’t see
how that would help us, if the maid never left the room.”

“_Évidemment_,” said Poirot, not disconcerted. “As Mademoiselle is
positive she did not leave the room——”

He was interrupted by the reappearance of the chambermaid and the
police searcher.

“Nothing,” said the latter laconically.

“I should hope not, indeed,” said the chambermaid virtuously. “And
that French hussy ought to be ashamed of herself taking away an
honest girl’s character!”

“There, there, my girl; that’s all right,” said the inspector,
opening the door. “Nobody suspects you. You go along and get on
with your work.”

The chambermaid went unwillingly.

“Going to search _her_?” she demanded, pointing at Célestine.

“Yes, yes!” He shut the door on her and turned the key.

Célestine accompanied the searcher into the small room in her turn.
A few minutes later she also returned. Nothing had been found on
her.

The inspector’s face grew graver.

“I’m afraid I’ll have to ask you to come along with me all the
same, miss.” He turned to Mrs. Opalsen. “I’m sorry, madam, but all
the evidence points that way. If she’s not got them on her, they’re
hidden somewhere about the room.”

Célestine uttered a piercing shriek, and clung to Poirot’s arm.
The latter bent and whispered something in the girl’s ear. She
looked up at him doubtfully.

“_Si, si, mon enfant_—I assure you it is better not to resist.”
Then he turned to the inspector. “You permit, monsieur? A little
experiment—purely for my own satisfaction.”

“Depends on what it is,” replied the police officer non-committally.

Poirot addressed Célestine once more.

“You have told us that you went into your room to fetch a reel of
cotton. Whereabouts was it?”

“On the top of the chest of drawers, monsieur.”

“And the scissors?”

“They also.”

“Would it be troubling you too much, mademoiselle, to ask you to
repeat those two actions? You were sitting here with your work,
you say?”

Célestine sat down, and then, at a sign from Poirot, rose, passed
into the adjoining room, took up an object from the chest of
drawers, and returned.

Poirot divided his attention between her movements and a large
turnip of a watch which he held in the palm of his hand.

“Again, if you please, mademoiselle.”

At the conclusion of the second performance, he made a note in his
pocket-book, and returned the watch to his pocket.

“Thank you, mademoiselle. And you, monsieur,”—he bowed to the
inspector—“for your courtesy.”

The inspector seemed somewhat entertained by this excessive
politeness. Célestine departed in a flood of tears, accompanied by
the woman and the plain-clothes official.

Then, with a brief apology to Mrs. Opalsen, the inspector set to
work to ransack the room. He pulled out drawers, opened cupboards,
completely unmade the bed, and tapped the floor. Mr. Opalsen looked
on sceptically.

“You really think you will find them?”

“Yes, sir. It stands to reason. She hadn’t time to take them out
of the room. The lady’s discovering the robbery so soon upset her
plans. No, they’re here right enough. One of the two must have
hidden them—and it’s very unlikely for the chambermaid to have done
so.”

“More than unlikely—impossible!” said Poirot quietly.

“Eh?” The inspector stared.

Poirot smiled modestly.

“I will demonstrate. Hastings, my good friend, take my watch in
your hand—with care. It is a family heirloom! Just now I timed
Mademoiselle’s movements—her first absence from the room was of
twelve seconds, her second of fifteen. Now observe my actions.
Madame will have the kindness to give me the key of the jewel-case.
I thank you. My friend Hastings will have the kindness to say
‘Go!’”

“Go!” I said.

With almost incredible swiftness, Poirot wrenched open the drawer
of the dressing-table, extracted the jewel-case, fitted the key in
the lock, opened the case, selected a piece of jewellery, shut and
locked the case, and returned it to the drawer, which he pushed to
again. His movements were like lightning.

“Well, _mon ami_?” he demanded of me breathlessly.

“Forty-six seconds,” I replied.

“You see?” He looked round. “There would not have been time for
the chambermaid even to take the necklace out, far less hide it.”

“Then that settles it on the maid,” said the inspector with
satisfaction, and returned to his search. He passed into the maid’s
bedroom next door.

Poirot was frowning thoughtfully. Suddenly he shot a question at
Mr. Opalsen.

“This necklace—it was, without doubt, insured?”

Mr. Opalsen looked a trifle surprised at the question.

“Yes,” he said hesitatingly, “that is so.”

“But what does that matter?” broke in Mrs. Opalsen tearfully. “It’s
my necklace I want. It was unique. No money could be the same.”

“I comprehend, madame,” said Poirot soothingly. “I comprehend
perfectly. To _la femme_ sentiment is everything—is it not so? But
monsieur, who has not the so fine susceptibility, will doubtless
find some slight consolation in the fact.”

“Of course, of course,” said Mr. Opalsen rather uncertainly.
“Still——”

He was interrupted by a shout of triumph from the inspector. He
came in dangling something from his fingers.

With a cry, Mrs. Opalsen heaved herself up from her chair. She was
a changed woman.

“Oh, oh, my necklace!”

She clasped it to her breast with both hands. We crowded round.

“Where was it?” demanded Opalsen.

“Maid’s bed. In among the springs of the wire mattress. She must
have stolen it and hidden it there before the chambermaid arrived
on the scene.”

“You permit, madame?” said Poirot gently. He took the necklace from
her and examined it closely; then handed it back with a bow.

“I’m afraid, madam, you’ll have to hand it over to us for the time
being,” said the inspector. “We shall want it for the charge. But
it shall be returned to you as soon as possible.”

Mr. Opalsen frowned.

“Is that necessary?”

“I’m afraid so, sir. Just a formality.”

“Oh, let him take it, Ed!” cried his wife. “I’d feel safer if he
did. I shouldn’t sleep a wink thinking some one else might try and
get hold of it. That wretched girl! And I would never have believed
it of her.”

“There, there, my dear, don’t take on so.”

I felt a gentle pressure on my arm. It was Poirot.

“Shall we slip away, my friend? I think our services are no longer
needed.”

Once outside, however, he hesitated, and then, much to my surprise,
he remarked:

“I should rather like to see the room next door.”

The door was not locked, and we entered. The room, which was a
large double one, was unoccupied. Dust lay about rather noticeably,
and my sensitive friend gave a characteristic grimace as he ran
his finger round a rectangular mark on a table near the window.

“The _service_ leaves to be desired,” he observed dryly.

He was staring thoughtfully out of the window, and seemed to have
fallen into a brown study.

“Well?” I demanded impatiently. “What did we come in here for?”

He started.

“_Je vous demande pardon, mon ami_. I wished to see if the door
was really bolted on this side also.”

“Well,” I said, glancing at the door which communicated with the
room we had just left, “it _is_ bolted.”

Poirot nodded. He still seemed to be thinking.

“And, anyway,” I continued, “what does it matter? The case is over.
I wish you’d had more chance of distinguishing yourself. But it
was the kind of case that even a stiff-backed idiot like that
inspector couldn’t go wrong over.”

Poirot shook his head.

“The case is not over, my friend. It will not be over until we find
out who stole the pearls.”

“But the maid did!”

“Why do you say that?”

“Why,” I stammered, “they were found—actually in her mattress.”

“Ta, ta, ta!” said Poirot impatiently. “Those were not the pearls.”

“What?”

“Imitation, _mon ami_.”

The statement took my breath away. Poirot was smiling placidly.

“The good inspector obviously knows nothing of jewels. But presently
there will be a fine hullabaloo!”

“Come!” I cried, dragging at his arm.

“Where?”

“We must tell the Opalsens at once.”

“I think not.”

“But that poor woman——”

“_Eh bien_; that poor woman, as you call her, will have a much
better night believing the jewels to be safe.”

“But the thief may escape with them!”

“As usual, my friend, you speak without reflection. How do you know
that the pearls Mrs. Opalsen locked up so carefully to-night were
not the false ones, and that the real robbery did not take place
at a much earlier date?”

“Oh!” I said, bewildered.

“Exactly,” said Poirot, beaming. “We start again.”

He led the way out of the room, paused a moment as though
considering, and then walked down to the end of the corridor,
stopping outside the small den where the chambermaids and valets
of the respective floors congregated. Our particular chambermaid
appeared to be holding a small court there, and to be retailing
her late experiences to an appreciative audience. She stopped in
the middle of a sentence. Poirot bowed with his usual politeness.

“Excuse that I derange you, but I shall be obliged if you will
unlock for me the door of Mr. Opalsen’s room.”

The woman rose willingly, and we accompanied her down the passage
again. Mr. Opalsen’s room was on the other side of the corridor,
its door facing that of his wife’s room. The chambermaid unlocked
it with her pass-key, and we entered.

As she was about to depart Poirot detained her.

“One moment; have you ever seen among the effects of Mr. Opalsen
a card like this?”

He held out a plain white card, rather highly glazed and uncommon
in appearance. The maid took it and scrutinized it carefully.

“No, sir, I can’t say I have. But, anyway, the valet has most to
do with the gentlemen’s rooms.”

“I see. Thank you.”

Poirot took back the card. The woman departed. Poirot appeared to
reflect a little. Then he gave a short, sharp nod of the head.

“Ring the bell, I pray of you, Hastings. Three times, for the
valet.”

I obeyed, devoured with curiosity. Meanwhile Poirot had emptied
the waste-paper-basket on the floor, and was swiftly going through
its contents.

In a few moments the valet answered the bell. To him Poirot put
the same question, and handed him the card to examine. But the
response was the same. The valet had never seen a card of that
particular quality among Mr. Opalsen’s belongings. Poirot thanked
him, and he withdrew, somewhat unwillingly, with an inquisitive
glance at the overturned waste-paper-basket and the litter on the
floor. He could hardly have helped overhearing Poirot’s thoughtful
remark as he bundled the torn papers back again:

“And the necklace was heavily insured. . . .”

“Poirot,” I cried,  “I see——”

“You see nothing, my friend,” he replied quickly. “As usual,
nothing at all! It is incredible—but there it is. Let us return to
our own apartments.”

We did so in silence. Once there, to my intense surprise, Poirot
effected a rapid change of clothing.

“I go to London to-night,” he explained. “It is imperative.”

“What?”

“Absolutely. The real work, that of the brain (ah, those brave
little grey cells), it is done. I go to seek the confirmation. I
shall find it! Impossible to deceive Hercule Poirot!”

“You’ll come a cropper one of these days,” I observed, rather
disgusted by his vanity.

“Do not be enraged, I beg of you, _mon ami_. I count on you to do
me a service—of your friendship.”

“Of course,” I said eagerly, rather ashamed of my moroseness. “What
is it?”

“The sleeve of my coat that I have taken off—will you brush it?
See you, a little white powder has clung to it. You without doubt
observed me run my finger round the drawer of the dressing-table?”

“No, I didn’t.”

“You should observe my actions, my friend. Thus I obtained the
powder on my finger, and, being a little over-excited, I rubbed it
on my sleeve; an action without method which I deplore—false to
all my principles.”

“But what was the powder?” I asked, not particularly interested in
Poirot’s principles.

“Not the poison of the Borgias,” replied Poirot, with a twinkle.
“I see your imagination mounting. I should say it was French
chalk.”

“French chalk?”

“Yes, cabinet-makers use it to make drawers run smoothly.”

I laughed.

“You old sinner! I thought you were working up to something
exciting.”

“Au revoir, my friend. I save myself. I fly!”

The door shut behind him. With a smile, half of derision, half of
affection, I picked up the coat, and stretched out my hand for the
clothes-brush.


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The next morning, hearing nothing from Poirot, I went out for a
stroll, met some old friends, and lunched with them at their hotel.
In the afternoon we went for a spin. A punctured tyre delayed us,
and it was past eight when I got back to the _Grand Metropolitan_.

The first sight that met my eyes was Poirot, looking even more
diminutive than usual, sandwiched between the Opalsens, beaming in
a state of placid satisfaction.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried, and sprang to meet me. “Embrace
me, my friend; all has marched to a marvel!”

Luckily, the embrace was merely figurative—not a thing one is
always sure of with Poirot.

“Do you mean——” I began.

“Just wonderful, I call it!” said Mrs. Opalsen, smiling all over
her fat face. “Didn’t I tell you, Ed, that if he couldn’t get back
my pearls nobody would?”

“You did, my dear, you did. And you were right.”

I looked helplessly at Poirot, and he answered the glance.

“My friend Hastings is, as you say in England, all at the seaside.
Seat yourself, and I will recount to you all the affair that has
so happily ended.”

“Ended?”

“But yes. They are arrested.”

“Who are arrested?”

“The chambermaid and the valet, _parbleu_! You did not suspect?
Not with my parting hint about the French chalk?”

“You said cabinet-makers used it.”

“Certainly they do—to make drawers slide easily. Somebody wanted
that drawer to slide in and out without any noise. Who could that
be? Obviously, only the chambermaid. The plan was so ingenious that
it did not at once leap to the eye—not even to the eye of Hercule
Poirot.

“Listen, this was how it was done. The valet was in the empty room
next door, waiting. The French maid leaves the room. Quick as a
flash the chambermaid whips open the drawer, takes out the
jewel-case, and, slipping back the bolt, passes it through the
door. The valet opens it at his leisure with the duplicate key with
which he has provided himself, extracts the necklace, and waits
his time. Célestine leaves the room again, and—pst!—in a flash the
case is passed back again and replaced in the drawer.

“Madame arrives, the theft is discovered. The chambermaid demands
to be searched, with a good deal of righteous indignation, and
leaves the room without a stain on her character. The imitation
necklace with which they have provided themselves has been concealed
in the French girl’s bed that morning by the chambermaid—a master
stroke, _ça!_”

“But what did you go to London for?”

“You remember the card?”

“Certainly. It puzzled me—and puzzles me still. I thought——”

I hesitated delicately, glancing at Mr. Opalsen.

Poirot laughed heartily.

“_Une blague!_ For the benefit of the valet. The card was one with
a specially prepared surface—for finger-prints. I went straight
to Scotland Yard, asked for our old friend Inspector Japp, and laid
the facts before him. As I had suspected, the finger-prints proved
to be those of two well-known jewel thieves who have been ‘wanted’
for some time. Japp came down with me, the thieves were arrested,
and the necklace was discovered in the valet’s possession. A clever
pair, but they failed in _method_. Have I not told you, Hastings,
at least thirty-six times, that without method——”

“At least thirty-six thousand times!” I interrupted. “But where
did their ‘method’ break down?”

“_Mon ami_, it is a good plan to take a place as chambermaid or
valet—but you must not shirk your work. They left an empty room
undusted; and therefore, when the man put down the jewel-case on
the little table near the communicating door, it left a square
mark——”

“I remember,” I cried.

“Before, I was undecided. Then—I _knew_!” There was a moment’s
silence.

“And I’ve got my pearls,” said Mrs. Opalsen as a sort of Greek
chorus.

“Well,” I said, “I’d better have some dinner.” Poirot accompanied
me.

“This ought to mean kudos for you,” I observed.

“_Pas du tout_,” replied Poirot tranquilly. “Japp and the local
inspector will divide the credit between them. But”—he tapped his
pocket—“I have a cheque here, from Mr. Opalsen, and, how say you,
my friend? This week-end has not gone according to plan. Shall we
return here next week-end—at my expense this time?”




  VIII


  The Kidnapped Prime Minister


Now that war and the problems of war are things of the past, I
think I may safely venture to reveal to the world the part which
my friend Poirot played in a moment of national crisis. The secret
has been well guarded. Not a whisper of it reached the Press. But,
now that the need for secrecy has gone by, I feel it is only just
that England should know the debt it owes to my quaint little
friend, whose marvellous brain so ably averted a great catastrophe.

One evening after dinner—I will not particularize the date; it
suffices to say that it was at the time when “Peace by negotiation”
was the parrot-cry of England’s enemies—my friend and I were
sitting in his rooms. After being invalided out of the Army I had
been given a recruiting job, and it had become my custom to drop
in on Poirot in the evenings after dinner and talk with him of any
cases of interest that he might have on hand.

I was attempting to discuss with him the sensational news of that
day—no less than an attempted assassination of Mr. David MacAdam,
England’s Prime Minister. The account in the papers had evidently
been carefully censored. No details were given, save that the Prime
Minister had had a marvellous escape, the bullet just grazing his
cheek.

I considered that our police must have been shamefully careless
for such an outrage to be possible. I could well understand that
the German agents in England would be willing to risk much for such
an achievement. “Fighting Mac,” as his own party had nicknamed him,
had strenuously and unequivocally combated the Pacifist influence
which was becoming so prevalent.

He was more than England’s Prime Minister—he _was_ England; and
to have removed him from his sphere of influence would have been
a crushing and paralysing blow to Britain.

Poirot was busy mopping a grey suit with a minute sponge. Never
was there a dandy such as Hercule Poirot. Neatness and order were
his passion. Now, with the odour of benzine filling the air, he
was quite unable to give me his full attention.

“In a little minute I am with you, my friend. I have all but
finished. The spot of grease—he is not good—I remove him—so!” He
waved his sponge.

I smiled as I lit another cigarette.

“Anything interesting on?” I inquired, after a minute or two.

“I assist a—how do you call it?—‘charlady’ to find her husband. A
difficult affair, needing the tact. For I have a little idea that
when he is found he will not be pleased. What would you? For my
part, I sympathize with him. He was a man of discrimination to lose
himself.”

I laughed.

“At last! The spot of grease, he is gone! I am at your disposal.”

“I was asking you what you thought of this attempt to assassinate
MacAdam?”

“_Enfantillage!_” replied Poirot promptly. “One can hardly take it
seriously. To fire with the rifle—never does it succeed. It is a
device of the past.”

“It was very near succeeding this time,” I reminded him.

Poirot shook his head impatiently. He was about to reply when the
landlady thrust her head round the door and informed him that there
were two gentlemen below who wanted to see him.

“They won’t give their names, sir, but they says as it’s very
important.”

“Let them mount,” said Poirot, carefully folding his grey trousers.

In a few minutes the two visitors were ushered in, and my heart
gave a leap as in the foremost I recognized no less a personage
than Lord Estair, Leader of the House of Commons; whilst his
companion, Mr. Bernard Dodge, was also a member of the War Cabinet,
and, as I knew, a close personal friend of the Prime Minister.

“Monsieur Poirot?” said Lord Estair interrogatively. My friend
bowed. The great man looked at me and hesitated. “My business is
private.”

“You may speak freely before Captain Hastings,” said my friend,
nodding to me to remain. “He has not all the gifts, no! But I
answer for his discretion.”

Lord Estair still hesitated, but Mr. Dodge broke in abruptly:

“Oh, come on—don’t let’s beat about the bush! As far as I can see,
the whole of England will know the hole we’re in soon enough.
Time’s everything.”

“Pray be seated, messieurs,” said Poirot politely. “Will you take
the big chair, _milord_?”

Lord Estair started slightly. “You know me?”

Poirot smiled. “Certainly. I read the little papers with the
pictures. How should I not know you?”

“Monsieur Poirot, I have come to consult you upon a matter of the
most vital urgency. I must ask for absolute secrecy.”

“You have the word of Hercule Poirot—I can say no more!” said my
friend grandiloquently.

“It concerns the Prime Minister. We are in grave trouble.”

“We’re up a tree!” interposed Mr. Dodge.

“The injury is serious, then?” I asked.

“What injury?”

“The bullet wound.”

“Oh, that!” cried Mr. Dodge contemptuously. “That’s old history.”

“As my colleague says,” continued Lord Estair, “that affair is over
and done with. Luckily, it failed. I wished I could say as much
for the second attempt.”

“There has been a second attempt, then?”

“Yes, though not of the same nature. Monsieur Poirot, the Prime
Minister has disappeared.”

“What?”

“He has been kidnapped!”

“Impossible!” I cried, stupefied.

Poirot threw a withering glance at me, which I knew enjoined me to
keep my mouth shut.

“Unfortunately, impossible as it seems, it is only too true,”
continued his lordship.

Poirot looked at Mr. Dodge. “You said just now, monsieur, that time
was everything. What did you mean by that?”

The two men exchanged glances, and then Lord Estair said:

“You have heard, Monsieur Poirot, of the approaching Allied
Conference?”

My friend nodded.

“For obvious reasons, no details have been given of when and where
it is to take place. But, although it has been kept out of the
newspapers, the date is, of course, widely known in diplomatic
circles. The Conference is to be held to-morrow—Thursday—evening
at Versailles. Now you perceive the terrible gravity of the
situation. I will not conceal from you that the Prime Minister’s
presence at the Conference is a vital necessity. The Pacifist
propaganda, started and maintained by the German agents in our
midst, has been very active. It is the universal opinion that the
turning point of the Conference will be the strong personality of
the Prime Minister. His absence may have the most serious
results—possibly a premature and disastrous peace. And we have no
one who can be sent in his place. He alone can represent England.”

Poirot’s face had grown very grave. “Then you regard the kidnapping
of the Prime Minister as a direct attempt to prevent his being
present at the Conference?”

“Most certainly I do. He was actually on his way to France at the
time.”

“And the Conference is to be held?”

“At nine o’clock to-morrow night.”

Poirot drew an enormous watch from his pocket.

“It is now a quarter to nine.”

“Twenty-four hours,” said Mr. Dodge thoughtfully.

“And a quarter,” amended Poirot. “Do not forget the quarter,
monsieur—it may come in useful. Now for the details—the abduction,
did it take place in England or in France?”

“In France. Mr. MacAdam crossed to France this morning. He was to
stay to-night as the guest of the Commander-in-Chief, proceeding
to-morrow to Paris. He was conveyed across the Channel by destroyer.
At Boulogne he was met by a car from General Headquarters and one
of the Commander-in-Chief’s A.D.C.s.”

“_Eh bien_?”

“Well, they started from Boulogne—but they never arrived.”

“What?”

“Monsieur Poirot, it was a bogus car and a bogus A.D.C. The real
car was found in a side road, with the chauffeur and the A.D.C.
neatly gagged and bound.”

“And the bogus car?”

“Is still at large.”

Poirot made a gesture of impatience. “Incredible! Surely it cannot
escape attention for long?”

“So we thought. It seemed merely a question of searching thoroughly.
That part of France is under Military Law. We were convinced that
the car could not go long unnoticed. The French police and our own
Scotland Yard men, and the military are straining every nerve. It
is, as you say, incredible—but nothing has been discovered!”

At that moment a tap came at the door, and a young officer entered
with a heavily sealed envelope which he handed to Lord Estair.

“Just through from France, sir. I brought it on here, as you
directed.”

The Minister tore it open eagerly, and uttered an exclamation. The
officer withdrew.

“Here is news at last! This telegram has just been decoded. They
have found the second car, also the secretary, Daniels, chloroformed,
gagged, and bound, in an abandoned farm near C——. He remembers
nothing, except something being pressed against his mouth and nose
from behind, and struggling to free himself. The police are
satisfied as to the genuineness of his statement.”

“And they have found nothing else?”

“No.”

“Not the Prime Minister’s dead body? Then, there is hope. But it
is strange. Why, after trying to shoot him this morning, are they
now taking so much trouble to keep him alive?”

Dodge shook his head. “One thing’s quite certain. They’re determined
at all costs to prevent his attending the Conference.”

“If it is humanly possible, the Prime Minister shall be there. God
grant it is not too late. Now, messieurs, recount to me
everything—from the beginning. I must know about this shooting
affair as well.”

“Last night, the Prime Minister, accompanied by one of his
secretaries, Captain Daniels——”

“The same who accompanied him to France?”

“Yes. As I was saying, they motored down to Windsor, where the
Prime Minister was granted an Audience. Early this morning, he
returned to town, and it was on the way that the attempted
assassination took place.”

“One moment, if you please. Who is this Captain Daniels? You have
his dossier?”

Lord Estair smiled. “I thought you would ask me that. We do not
know very much of him. He is of no particular family. He has served
in the English Army, and is an extremely able secretary, being an
exceptionally fine linguist. I believe he speaks seven languages.
It is for that reason that the Prime Minister chose him to accompany
him to France.”

“Has he any relatives in England?”

“Two aunts. A Mrs. Everard, who lives at Hampstead, and a Miss
Daniels, who lives near Ascot.”

“Ascot? That is near to Windsor, is it not?”

“That point has not been overlooked. But it has led to nothing.”

“You regard the Capitaine Daniels, then, as above suspicion?”

A shade of bitterness crept into Lord Estair’s voice, as he replied:

“No, Monsieur Poirot. In these days, I should hesitate before I
pronounced _anyone_ above suspicion.”

“_Très bien_. Now I understand, _milord_, that the Prime Minister
would, as a matter of course, be under vigilant police protection,
which ought to render any assault upon him an impossibility?”

Lord Estair bowed his head. “That is so. The Prime Minister’s car
was closely followed by another car containing detectives in plain
clothes. Mr. MacAdam knew nothing of these precautions. He is
personally a most fearless man, and would be inclined to sweep them
away arbitrarily. But, naturally, the police make their own
arrangements. In fact, the Premier’s chauffeur, O’Murphy, is a
C.I.D. man.”

“O’Murphy? That is a name of Ireland, is it not so?”

“Yes, he is an Irishman.”

“From what part of Ireland?”

“County Clare, I believe.”

“_Tiens!_ But proceed, _milord_.”

“The Premier started for London. The car was a closed one. He and
Captain Daniels sat inside. The second car followed as usual. But,
unluckily, for some unknown reason, the Prime Minister’s car
deviated from the main road——”

“At a point where the road curves?” interrupted Poirot.

“Yes—but how did you know?”

“Oh, _c’est évident_! Continue!”

“For some unknown reason,” continued Lord Estair, “the Premier’s
car left the main road. The police car, unaware of the deviation,
continued to keep to the high road. At a short distance down the
unfrequented lane, the Prime Minister’s car was suddenly held up
by a band of masked men. The chauffeur——”

“That brave O’Murphy!” murmured Poirot thoughtfully.

“The chauffeur, momentarily taken aback, jammed on the brakes. The
Prime Minister put his head out of the window. Instantly a shot
rang out—then another. The first one grazed his cheek, the second,
fortunately, went wide. The chauffeur, now realizing the danger,
instantly forged straight ahead, scattering the band of men.”

“A near escape,” I ejaculated, with a shiver.

“Mr. MacAdam refused to make any fuss over the slight wound he had
received. He declared it was only a scratch. He stopped at a local
cottage hospital, where it was dressed and bound up—he did not, of
course, reveal his identity. He then drove, as per schedule,
straight to Charing Cross, where a special train for Dover was
awaiting him, and, after a brief account of what had happened had
been given to the anxious police by Captain Daniels, he duly
departed for France. At Dover, he went on board the waiting
destroyer. At Boulogne, as you know, the bogus car was waiting for
him, carrying the Union Jack, and correct in every detail.”

“That is all you have to tell me?”

“Yes.”

“There is no other circumstance that you have omitted, milord?”

“Well, there is one rather peculiar thing.”

“Yes?”

“The Prime Minister’s car did not return home after leaving the
Prime Minister at Charing Cross. The police were anxious to
interview O’Murphy, so a search was instituted at once. The car
was discovered standing outside a certain unsavoury little
restaurant in Soho, which is well known as a meeting-place of
German agents.”

“And the chauffeur?”

“The chauffeur was nowhere to be found. He, too, had disappeared.”

“So,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “there are two disappearances: the
Prime Minister in France, and O’Murphy in London.”

He looked keenly at Lord Estair, who made a gesture of despair.

“I can only tell you, Monsieur Poirot, that, if anyone had suggested
to me yesterday that O’Murphy was a traitor, I should have laughed
in his face.”

“And to-day?”

“To-day I do not know what to think.”

Poirot nodded gravely. He looked at his turnip of a watch again.

“I understand that I have carte blanche, messieurs—in every way,
I mean? I must be able to go where I choose, and how I choose.”

“Perfectly. There is a special train leaving for Dover in an hour’s
time, with a further contingent from Scotland Yard. You shall be
accompanied by a Military officer and a C.I.D. man, who will hold
themselves at your disposal in every way. Is that satisfactory?”

“Quite. One more question before you leave, messieurs. What made
you come to me? I am unknown, obscure, in this great London of
yours.”

“We sought you out on the express recommendation and wish of a very
great man of your own country.”

“_Comment?_ My old friend the _Préfet_——?”

Lord Estair shook his head.

“One higher than the _Préfet_. One whose word was once law in
Belgium—and shall be again! That England has sworn!”

Poirot’s hand flew swiftly to a dramatic salute. “Amen to that!
Ah, but my Master does not forget. . . . Messieurs, I, Hercule
Poirot, will serve you faithfully. Heaven only send that it will
be in time. But this is dark—dark. . . . I cannot see.”

“Well, Poirot,” I cried impatiently, as the door closed behind the
Ministers, “what do you think?”

My friend was busy packing a minute suitcase, with quick, deft
movements. He shook his head thoughtfully.

“I do not know what to think. My brains desert me.”

“Why, as you said, kidnap him, when a knock on the head would do
as well?” I mused.

“Pardon me, _mon ami_, but I did not quite say that. It is
undoubtedly far more their affair to kidnap him.”

“But why?”

“Because uncertainty creates panic. That is one reason. Were the
Prime Minister dead, it would be a terrible calamity, but the
situation would have to be faced. But now you have paralysis. Will
the Prime Minister reappear, or will he not? Is he dead or alive?
Nobody knows, and until they know nothing definite can be done.
And, as I tell you, uncertainty breeds panic, which is what _les
Boches_ are playing for. Then, again, if the kidnappers are holding
him secretly somewhere, they have the advantage of being able to
make terms with both sides. The German Government is not a liberal
paymaster, as a rule, but no doubt they can be made to disgorge
substantial remittances in such a case as this. Thirdly, they run
no risk of the hangman’s rope. Oh, decidedly, kidnapping is their
affair.”

“Then, if that is so, why should they first try to shoot him?”

Poirot made a gesture of anger. “Ah, that is just what I do not
understand! It is inexplicable—stupid! They have all their
arrangements made (and very good arrangements too!) for the
abduction, and yet they imperil the whole affair by a melodramatic
attack, worthy of a Cinema, and quite as unreal. It is almost
impossible to believe in it, with its band of masked men, not
twenty miles from London!”

“Perhaps they were two quite separate attempts which happened
irrespective of each other,” I suggested.

“Ah, no, that would be too much of a coincidence! Then, further—who
is the traitor? There must have been a traitor—in the first affair,
anyway. But who was it—Daniels or O’Murphy? It must have been one
of the two, or why did the car leave the main road? We cannot
suppose that the Prime Minister connived at his own assassination!
Did O’Murphy take that turning of his own accord, or was it Daniels
who told him to do so?”

“Surely it must have been O’Murphy’s doing.”

“Yes, because if it was Daniels’ the Prime Minister would have
heard the order, and would have asked the reason. But there are
altogether too many ‘whys’ in this affair, and they contradict each
other. If O’Murphy is an honest man, _why_ did he leave the main
road? But if he was a dishonest man, _why_ did he start the car
again when only two shots had been fired—thereby, in all probability,
saving the Prime Minister’s life? And, again, if he was honest,
why did he, immediately on leaving Charing Cross, drive to a
well-known rendezvous of German spies?”

“It looks bad,” I said.

“Let us look at the case with method. What have we for and against
these two men? Take O’Murphy first. Against: that his conduct in
leaving the main road was suspicious; that he is an Irishman from
County Clare; that he has disappeared in a highly suggestive
manner. For: that his promptness in restarting the car saved the
Premier’s life; that he is a Scotland Yard man, and, obviously,
from the post allotted to him, a trusted detective. Now for Daniels.
There is not much against him, except the fact that nothing is
known of his antecedents, and that he speaks too many languages
for a good Englishman! (Pardon me, _mon ami_, but, as linguists,
you are deplorable!) _Now for him_, we have the fact that he was
found gagged, bound, and chloroformed—which does not look as though
he had anything to do with the matter.”

“He might have gagged and bound himself, to divert suspicion.”

Poirot shook his head. “The French police would make no mistake of
that kind. Besides, once he had attained his object, and the Prime
Minister was safely abducted, there would not be much point in his
remaining behind. His accomplices _could_ have gagged and
chloroformed him, of course, but I fail to see what object they
hoped to accomplish by it. He can be of little use to them now,
for, until the circumstances concerning the Prime Minister have
been cleared up, he is bound to be closely watched.”

“Perhaps he hoped to start the police on a false scent?”

“Then why did he not do so? He merely says that something was
pressed over his nose and mouth, and that he remembers nothing
more. There is no false scent there. It sounds remarkably like the
truth.”

“Well,” I said, glancing at the clock, “I suppose we’d better start
for the station. You may find more clues in France.”

“Possibly, _mon ami_, but I doubt it. It is still incredible to me
that the Prime Minister has not been discovered in that limited
area, where the difficulty of concealing him must be tremendous.
If the military and the police of two countries have not found him,
how shall I?”

At Charing Cross we were met by Mr. Dodge.

“This is Detective Barnes, of Scotland Yard, and Major Norman. They
will hold themselves entirely at your disposal. Good luck to you.
It’s a bad business, but I’ve not given up hope. Must be off now.”
And the Minister strode rapidly away.

We chatted in a desultory fashion with Major Norman. In the centre
of the little group of men on the platform I recognized a little
ferret-faced fellow talking to a tall, fair man. He was an old
acquaintance of Poirot’s—Detective-Inspector Japp, supposed to be
one of the smartest of Scotland Yard’s officers. He came over and
greeted my friend cheerfully.

“I heard you were on this job too. Smart bit of work. So far
they’ve got away with the goods all right. But I can’t believe they
can keep him hidden long. Our people are going through France with
a toothcomb. So are the French. I can’t help feeling it’s only a
matter of hours now.”

“That is, if he’s still alive,” remarked the tall detective
gloomily.

Japp’s face fell. “Yes. . . . But somehow I’ve got the feeling he’s
alive all right.”

Poirot nodded. “Yes, yes; he’s alive. But can he be found in time?
I, like you, did not believe he could be hidden so long.”

The whistle blew, and we all trooped up into the Pullman car. Then,
with a slow, unwilling jerk, the train drew out of the station.

It was a curious journey. The Scotland Yard men crowded together.
Maps of Northern France were spread out, and eager forefingers
traced the lines of roads and villages. Each man had his own pet
theory. Poirot showed none of his usual loquacity, but sat staring
in front of him, with an expression on his face that reminded me
of a puzzled child. I talked to Norman, whom I found quite an
amusing fellow. On arriving at Dover Poirot’s behaviour moved me
to intense amusement. The little man, as he went on board the boat,
clutched desperately at my arm. The wind was blowing lustily.

“_Mon Dieu!_” he murmured. “This is terrible!”

“Have courage, Poirot,” I cried. “You will succeed. You will find
him. I am sure of it.”

“Ah, _mon ami_, you mistake my emotion. It is this villainous sea
that troubles me! The _mal de mer_—it is horrible suffering!”

“Oh!” I said, rather taken aback.

The first throb of the engines was felt, and Poirot groaned and
closed his eyes.

“Major Norman has a map of Northern France if you would like to
study it?”

Poirot shook his head impatiently.

“But no, but no! Leave me, my friend. See you, to think, the
stomach and the brain must be in harmony. Laverguier has a method
most excellent for averting the _mal de mer_. You breathe in—and
out—slowly, so—turning the head from left to right and counting
six between each breath.”

I left him to his gymnastic endeavours, and went on deck.

As we came slowly into Boulogne Harbour Poirot appeared, neat and
smiling, and announced to me in a whisper that Laverguier’s system
had succeeded “to a marvel!”

Japp’s forefinger was still tracing imaginary routes on his map.
“Nonsense! The car started from Boulogne—here they branched off.
Now, my idea is that they transferred the Prime Minister to another
car. See?”

“Well,” said the tall detective, “I shall make for the seaports.
Ten to one, they’ve smuggled him on board a ship.”

Japp shook his head. “Too obvious. The order went out at once to
close all the ports.”

The day was just breaking as we landed. Major Norman touched Poirot
on the arm. “There’s a military car here waiting for you, sir.”

“Thank you, monsieur. But, for the moment, I do not propose to
leave Boulogne.”

“What?”

“No, we will enter this hotel here, by the quay.”

He suited the action to the word, demanded and was accorded a
private room. We three followed him, puzzled and uncomprehending.

He shot a quick glance at us. “It is not so that the good detective
should act, eh? I perceive your thought. He must be full of energy.
He must rush to and fro. He should prostrate himself on the dusty
road and seek the marks of tyres through a little glass. He must
gather up the cigarette-end, the fallen match? That is your idea,
is it not?”

His eyes challenged us. “But I—Hercule Poirot—tell you that it is
not so! The true clues are within—_here_!” He tapped his forehead.
“See you, I need not have left London. It would have been sufficient
for me to sit quietly in my rooms there. All that matters is the
little grey cells within. Secretly and silently they do their part,
until suddenly I call for a map, and I lay my finger on a
spot—so—and I say: the Prime Minister is _there_! And it is so!
With method and logic one can accomplish anything! This frantic
rushing to France was a mistake—it is playing a child’s game of
hide-and-seek. But now, though it may be too late, I will set to
work the right way, from within. Silence, my friends, I beg of
you.”

And for five long hours the little man sat motionless, blinking
his eyelids like a cat, his green eyes flickering and becoming
steadily greener and greener. The Scotland Yard man was obviously
contemptuous, Major Norman was bored and impatient, and I myself
found the time pass with wearisome slowness.

Finally, I got up, and strolled as noiselessly as I could to the
window. The matter was becoming a farce. I was secretly concerned
for my friend. If he failed, I would have preferred him to fail in
a less ridiculous manner. Out of the window I idly watched the
daily leave boat, belching forth columns of smoke, as she lay
alongside the quay.

Suddenly I was aroused by Poirot’s voice close to my elbow.

“_Mes amis_, let us start!”

I turned. An extraordinary transformation had come over my friend.
His eyes were flickering with excitement, his chest was swelled to
the uttermost.

“I have been an imbecile, my friends! But I see daylight at last.”

Major Norman moved hastily to the door. “I’ll order the car.”

“There is no need. I shall not use it. Thank Heaven the wind has
fallen.”

“Do you mean you are going to walk, sir?”

“No, my young friend. I am no St. Peter. I prefer to cross the sea
by boat.”

“To cross the _sea_?”

“Yes. To work with method, one must begin from the beginning. And
the beginning of this affair was in England. Therefore, we return
to England.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


At three o’clock, we stood once more upon Charing Cross platform.
To all our expostulations, Poirot turned a deaf ear, and reiterated
again and again that to start at the beginning was not a waste of
time, but the only way. On the way over, he had conferred with
Norman in a low voice, and the latter had despatched a sheaf of
telegrams from Dover.

Owing to the special passes held by Norman, we got through
everywhere in record time. In London, a large police car was
waiting for us, with some plain-clothes men, one of whom handed a
typewritten sheet of paper to my friend. He answered my inquiring
glance.

“A list of the cottage hospitals within a certain radius west of
London. I wired for it from Dover.”

We were whirled rapidly through the London streets. We were on the
Bath Road. On we went, through Hammersmith, Chiswick and Brentford.
I began to see our objective. Through Windsor and on to Ascot. My
heart gave a leap. Ascot was where Daniels had an aunt living. We
were after _him_, then, not O’Murphy.

We duly stopped at the gate of a trim villa. Poirot jumped out and
rang the bell. I saw a perplexed frown dimming the radiance of his
face. Plainly, he was not satisfied. The bell was answered. He was
ushered inside. In a few moments he reappeared, and climbed into
the car with a short, sharp shake of his head. My hopes began to
die down. It was past four now. Even if he found certain evidence
incriminating Daniels, what would be the good of it, unless he
could wring from some one the exact spot in France where they were
holding the Prime Minister?

Our return progress towards London was an interrupted one. We
deviated from the main road more than once, and occasionally
stopped at a small building, which I had no difficulty in
recognizing as a cottage hospital. Poirot only spent a few minutes
at each, but at every halt his radiant assurance was more and more
restored.

He whispered something to Norman, to which the latter replied:

“Yes, if you turn off to the left, you will find them waiting by
the bridge.”

We turned up a side road, and in the failing light I discerned a
second car, waiting by the side of the road. It contained two men
in plain clothes. Poirot got down and spoke to them, and then we
started off in a northerly direction, the other car following close
behind.

We drove for some time, our objective being obviously one of the
northern suburbs of London. Finally, we drove up to the front door
of a tall house, standing a little back from the road in its own
grounds.

Norman and I were left with the car. Poirot and one of the
detectives went up to the door and rang. A neat parlourmaid opened
it. The detective spoke.

“I am a police officer, and I have a warrant to search this house.”

The girl gave a little scream, and a tall, handsome woman of
middle-age appeared behind her in the hall.

“Shut the door, Edith. They are burglars, I expect.”

But Poirot swiftly inserted his foot in the door, and at the same
moment blew a whistle. Instantly the other detectives ran up, and
poured into the house, shutting the door behind them.

Norman and I spent about five minutes cursing our forced inactivity.
Finally the door reopened, and the men emerged, escorting three
prisoners—a woman and two men. The woman, and one of the men, were
taken to the second car. The other man was placed in our car by
Poirot himself.

“I must go with the others, my friend. But have great care of this
gentleman. You do not know him, no? _Eh bien_, let me present to
you, Monsieur O’Murphy!”

O’Murphy! I _gaped_ at him open-mouthed as we started again. He
was not handcuffed, but I did not fancy he would try to escape. He
sat there staring in front of him as though dazed. Anyway, Norman
and I would be more than a match for him.

To my surprise, we still kept a northerly route. We were not
returning to London, then! I was much puzzled. Suddenly, as the
car slowed down, I recognized that we were close to Hendon
Aerodrome. Immediately I grasped Poirot’s idea. He proposed to
reach France by aeroplane.

It was a sporting idea, but, on the face of it, impracticable. A
telegram would be far quicker. Time was everything. He must leave
the personal glory of rescuing the Prime Minister to others.

As we drew up, Major Norman jumped out, and a plain-clothes man
took his place. He conferred with Poirot for a few minutes, and
then went off briskly.

I, too, jumped out, and caught Poirot by the arm.

“I congratulate you, old fellow! They have told you the hiding-place?
But, look here, you must wire to France at once. You’ll be too late
if you go yourself.”

Poirot looked at me curiously for a minute or two.

“Unfortunately, my friend, there are some things that cannot be
sent by telegram.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


At that moment Major Norman returned, accompanied by a young
officer in the uniform of the Flying Corps.

“This is Captain Lyall, who will fly you over to France. He can
start at once.”

“Wrap up warmly, sir,” said the young pilot. “I can lend you a
coat, if you like.”

Poirot was consulting his enormous watch. He murmured to himself:
“Yes, there is time—just time.” Then he looked up, and bowed
politely to the young officer. “I thank you, monsieur. But it is
not I who am your passenger. It is this gentleman here.”

He moved a little aside as he spoke, and a figure came forward out
of the darkness. It was the second male prisoner who had gone in
the other car, and as the light fell on his face, I gave a gasp of
surprise.

_It was the Prime Minister!_


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


“For Heaven’s sake, tell me all about it,” I cried impatiently, as
Poirot, Norman, and I motored back to London. “How in the world
did they manage to smuggle him back to England?”

“There was no need to smuggle him back,” replied Poirot dryly. “The
Prime Minister has never left England. He was kidnapped on his way
from Windsor to London.”

“What?”

“I will make all clear. The Prime Minister was in his car, his
secretary beside him. Suddenly a pad of chloroform is clapped on
his face——”

“But by whom?”

“By the clever linguistic Captain Daniels. As soon as the Prime
Minister is unconscious, Daniels picks up the speaking-tube, and
directs O’Murphy to turn to the right, which the chauffeur, quite
unsuspicious, does. A few yards down that unfrequented road, a
large car is standing, apparently broken down. Its driver signals
to O’Murphy to stop. O’Murphy slows up. The stranger approaches.
Daniels leans out of the window, and, probably with the aid of an
instantaneous anæsthetic, such as ethylchloride, the chloroform
trick is repeated. In a few seconds, the two helpless men are
dragged out and transferred to the other car, and a pair of
substitutes take their places.”

“Impossible!”

“_Pas du tout!_ Have you not seen music-hall turns imitating
celebrities with marvellous accuracy? Nothing is easier than to
personate a public character. The Prime Minister of England is far
easier to understudy than Mr. John Smith of Clapham, say. As for
O’Murphy’s ‘double,’ no one was going to take much notice of him
until after the departure of the Prime Minister, and by then he
would have made himself scarce. He drives straight from Charing
Cross to the meeting-place of his friends. He goes in as O’Murphy,
he emerges as some one quite different. O’Murphy has disappeared,
leaving a conveniently suspicious trail behind him.”

“But the man who personated the Prime Minister was seen by every
one!”

“He was not seen by anyone who knew him privately or intimately.
And Daniels shielded him from contact with anyone as much as
possible. Moreover, his face was bandaged up, and anything unusual
in his manner would be put down to the fact that he was suffering
from shock as a result of the attempt upon his life. Mr. MacAdam
has a weak throat, and always spares his voice as much as possible
before any great speech. The deception was perfectly easy to keep
up as far as France. There it would be impracticable and
impossible—so the Prime Minister disappears. The police of this
country hurry across the Channel, and no one bothers to go into
the details of the first attack. To sustain the illusion that the
abduction has taken place in France, Daniels is gagged and
chloroformed in a convincing manner.”

“And the man who has enacted the part of the Prime Minister?”

“Rids himself of his disguise. He and the bogus chauffeur may be
arrested as suspicious characters, but no one will dream of
suspecting their real part in the drama, and they will eventually
be released for lack of evidence.”

“And the real Prime Minister?”

“He and O’Murphy were driven straight to the house of ‘Mrs.
Everard,’ at Hampstead, Daniels’ so-called ‘aunt.’ In reality, she
is Frau Bertha Ebenthal, and the police have been looking for her
for some time. It is a valuable little present that I have made to
them—to say nothing of Daniels! Ah, it was a clever plan, but he
did not reckon on the cleverness of Hercule Poirot!”

I think my friend might well be excused his moment of vanity.

“When did you first begin to suspect the truth of the matter?”

“When I began to work the right way—from _within_! I could not make
that shooting affair fit in—but when I saw that the net result of
it was that _the Prime Minister went to France with his face bound
up_ I began to comprehend! And when I visited all the cottage
hospitals between Windsor and London, and found that no one
answering to my description had had his face bound up and dressed
that morning, I was sure! After that, it was child’s-play for a
mind like mine!”

  •   •   •   •   •   •   •

The following morning, Poirot showed me a telegram he had just
received. It had no place of origin, and was unsigned. It ran:

“In time.”

Later in the day the evening papers published an account of the
Allied Conference. They laid particular stress on the magnificent
ovation accorded to Mr. David MacAdam, whose inspiring speech had
produced a deep and lasting impression.




  IX


  The Disappearance of Mr. Davenheim


Poirot and I were expecting our old friend Inspector Japp of
Scotland Yard to tea. We were sitting round the tea-table awaiting
his arrival. Poirot had just finished carefully straightening the
cups and saucers which our landlady was in the habit of throwing,
rather than placing, on the table. He had also breathed heavily on
the metal teapot, and polished it with a silk handkerchief. The
kettle was on the boil, and a small enamel saucepan beside it
contained some thick, sweet chocolate which was more to Poirot’s
palate than what he described as “your English poison.” A sharp
“rat-tat” sounded below, and a few minutes afterwards Japp entered
briskly.

“Hope I’m not late,” he said as he greeted us. “To tell the truth,
I was yarning with Miller, the man who’s in charge of the Davenheim
case.”

I pricked up my ears. For the last three days the papers had been
full of the strange disappearance of Mr. Davenheim, senior partner
of Davenheim and Salmon, the well-known bankers and financiers. On
Saturday last he had walked out of his house, and had never been
seen since. I looked forward to extracting some interesting details
from Japp.

“I should have thought,” I remarked, “that it would be almost
impossible for anyone to ‘disappear’ nowadays.”

Poirot moved a plate of bread and butter the eighth of an inch,
and said sharply:

“Be exact, my friend. What do you mean by ‘disappear’? To which
class of disappearance are you referring?”

“Are disappearances classified and labelled, then?” I laughed.

Japp smiled also. Poirot frowned at us both.

“But certainly they are! They fall into three categories: First,
and most common, the voluntary disappearance. Second, the much
abused ‘loss of memory’ case—rare, but occasionally genuine. Third,
murder, and a more or less successful disposal of the body. Do you
refer to all three as impossible of execution?”

“Very nearly so, I should think. You might lose your own memory,
but some one would be sure to recognize you—especially in the case
of a well-known man like Davenheim. Then ‘bodies’ can’t be made to
vanish into thin air. Sooner or later they turn up, concealed in
lonely places, or in trunks. Murder will out. In the same way, the
absconding clerk, or the domestic defaulter, is bound to be run
down in these days of wireless telegraphy. He can be headed off
from foreign countries; ports and railway stations are watched;
and, as for concealment in this country, his features and appearance
will be known to every one who reads a daily newspaper. He’s up
against civilization.”

“_Mon ami_,” said Poirot, “you make one error. You do not allow
for the fact that a man who had decided to make away with another
man—or with himself in a figurative sense—might be that rare
machine, a man of method. He might bring intelligence, talent, a
careful calculation of detail to the task; and then I do not see
why he should not be successful in baffling the police force.”

“But not _you_, I suppose?” said Japp good-humouredly, winking at
me. “He couldn’t baffle _you_, eh, Monsieur Poirot?”

Poirot endeavoured, with a marked lack of success, to look modest.
“Me, also! Why not? It is true that I approach such problems with
an exact science, a mathematical precision, which seems, alas, only
too rare in the new generation of detectives!”

Japp grinned more widely.

“I don’t know,” he said. “Miller, the man who’s on this case, is
a smart chap. You may be very sure he won’t overlook a footprint,
or a cigar-ash, or a crumb even. He’s got eyes that see everything.”

“So, _mon ami_,” said Poirot, “has the London sparrow. But all the
same, I should not ask the little brown bird to solve the problem
of Mr. Davenheim.”

“Come now, monsieur, you’re not going to run down the value of
details as clues?”

“By no means. These things are all good in their way. The danger
is they may assume undue importance. Most details are insignificant;
one or two are vital. It is the brain, the little grey cells”—he
tapped his forehead—“on which one must rely. The senses mislead.
One must seek the truth within—not without.”

“You don’t mean to say, Monsieur Poirot, that you would undertake
to solve a case without moving from your chair, do you?”

“That is exactly what I do mean—granted the facts were placed
before me. I regard myself as a consulting specialist.”

Japp slapped his knee. “Hanged if I don’t take you at your word.
Bet you a fiver that you can’t lay your hand—or rather tell me
where to lay my hand—on Mr. Davenheim, dead or alive, before a week
is out.”

Poirot considered. “_Eh bien, mon ami_, I accept. _Le sport_, it
is the passion of you English. Now—the facts.”

“On Saturday last, as is his usual custom, Mr. Davenheim took the
12.40 train from Victoria to Chingside, where his palatial country
place, The Cedars, is situated. After lunch, he strolled round the
grounds, and gave various directions to the gardeners. Everybody
agrees that his manner was absolutely normal and as usual. After
tea he put his head into his wife’s boudoir, saying that he was
going to stroll down to the village and post some letters. He added
that he was expecting a Mr. Lowen, on business. If he should come
before he himself returned, he was to be shown into the study and
asked to wait. Mr. Davenheim then left the house by the front door,
passed leisurely down the drive, and out at the gate, and—was never
seen again. From that hour, he vanished completely.”

“Pretty—very pretty—altogether a charming little problem,” murmured
Poirot. “Proceed, my good friend.”

“About a quarter of an hour later a tall, dark man with a thick
black moustache rang the front-door bell, and explained that he
had an appointment with Mr. Davenheim. He gave the name of Lowen,
and in accordance with the banker’s instructions was shown into
the study. Nearly an hour passed. Mr. Davenheim did not return.
Finally Mr. Lowen rang the bell, and explained that he was unable
to wait any longer, as he must catch his train back to town. Mrs.
Davenheim apologized for her husband’s absence, which seemed
unaccountable, as she knew him to have been expecting the visitor.
Mr. Lowen reiterated his regrets and took his departure.

“Well, as every one knows, Mr. Davenheim did not return. Early on
Sunday morning the police were communicated with, but could make
neither head nor tail of the matter. Mr. Davenheim seemed literally
to have vanished into thin air. He had not been to the post office;
nor had he been seen passing through the village. At the station
they were positive he had not departed by any train. His own motor
had not left the garage. If he had hired a car to meet him in some
lonely spot, it seems almost certain that by this time, in view of
the large reward offered for information, the driver of it would
have come forward to tell what he knew. True, there was a small
race-meeting at Entfield, five miles away, and if he had walked to
that station he might have passed unnoticed in the crowd. But since
then his photograph and a full description of him have been
circulated in every newspaper, and nobody has been able to give
any news of him. We have, of course, received many letters from
all over England, but each clue, so far, has ended in disappointment.

“On Monday morning a further sensational discovery came to light.
Behind a portière in Mr. Davenheim’s study stands a safe, and that
safe had been broken into and rifled. The windows were fastened
securely on the inside, which seems to put an ordinary burglary
out of court, unless, of course, an accomplice within the house
fastened them again afterwards. On the other hand, Sunday having
intervened, and the household being in a state of chaos, it is
likely that the burglary was committed on the Saturday, and remained
undetected until Monday.”

“_Précisément_,” said Poirot dryly. “Well, is he arrested, _ce
pauvre M. Lowen_?”

Japp grinned. “Not yet. But he’s under pretty close supervision.”

Poirot nodded. “What was taken from the safe? Have you any idea?”

“We’ve been going into that with the junior partner of the firm
and Mrs. Davenheim. Apparently there was a considerable amount in
bearer bonds, and a very large sum in notes, owing to some large
transaction having been just carried through. There was also a
small fortune in jewellery. All Mrs. Davenheim’s jewels were kept
in the safe. The purchasing of them had become a passion with her
husband of late years, and hardly a month passed that he did not
make her a present of some rare and costly gem.”

“Altogether a good haul,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “Now, what
about Lowen? Is it known what his business was with Davenheim that
evening?”

“Well, the two men were apparently not on very good terms. Lowen
is a speculator in quite a small way. Nevertheless, he has been
able once or twice to score a _coup_ off Davenheim in the market,
though it seems they seldom or never actually met. It was a matter
concerning some South American shares which led the banker to make
his appointment.”

“Had Davenheim interests in South America, then?”

“I believe so. Mrs. Davenheim happened to mention that he spent
all last autumn in Buenos Ayres.”

“Any trouble in his home life? Were the husband and wife on good
terms?”

“I should say his domestic life was quite peaceful and uneventful.
Mrs. Davenheim is a pleasant, rather unintelligent woman. Quite a
nonentity, I think.”

“Then we must not look for the solution of the mystery there. Had
he any enemies?”

“He had plenty of financial rivals, and no doubt there are many
people whom he has got the better of who bear him no particular
good-will. But there was no one likely to make away with him—and,
if they had, where is the body?”

“Exactly. As Hastings says, bodies have a habit of coming to light
with fatal persistency.”

“By the way, one of the gardeners says he saw a figure going round
to the side of the house toward the rose-garden. The long French
window of the study opens on to the rose-garden, and Mr. Davenheim
frequently entered and left the house that way. But the man was a
good way off, at work on some cucumber frames, and cannot even say
whether it was the figure of his master or not. Also, he cannot
fix the time with any accuracy. It must have been before six, as
the gardeners cease work at that time.”

“And Mr. Davenheim left the house?”

“About half-past five or thereabouts.”

“What lies beyond the rose-garden?”

“A lake.”

“With a boathouse?”

“Yes, a couple of punts are kept there. I suppose you’re thinking
of suicide, Monsieur Poirot? Well, I don’t mind telling you that
Miller’s going down to-morrow expressly to see that piece of water
dragged. That’s the kind of man he is!”

Poirot smiled faintly, and turned to me. “Hastings, I pray you,
hand me that copy of the _Daily Megaphone_. If I remember rightly,
there is an unusually clear photograph there of the missing man.”

I rose, and found the sheet required. Poirot studied the features
attentively.

“H’m!” he murmured. “Wears his hair rather long and wavy, full
moustache and pointed beard, bushy eyebrows. Eyes dark?”

“Yes.”

“Hair and beard turning grey?”

The detective nodded. “Well, Monsieur Poirot, what have you got to
say to it all? Clear as daylight, eh?”

“On the contrary, most obscure.”

The Scotland Yard man looked pleased.

“Which gives me great hopes of solving it,” finished Poirot
placidly.

“Eh?”

“I find it a good sign when a case is obscure. If a thing is clear
as daylight—_eh bien_, mistrust it! Some one has made it so.”

Japp shook his head almost pityingly. “Well, each to their fancy.
But it’s not a bad thing to see your way clear ahead.”

“I do not see,” murmured Poirot. “I shut my eyes—and think.”

Japp sighed. “Well, you’ve got a clear week to think in.”

“And you will bring me any fresh developments that arise—the result
of the labours of the hard-working and lynx-eyed Inspector Miller,
for instance?”

“Certainly. That’s in the bargain.”

“Seems a shame, doesn’t it?” said Japp to me as I accompanied him
to the door. “Like robbing a child!”

I could not help agreeing with a smile. I was still smiling as I
re-entered the room.

“_Eh bien!_” said Poirot immediately. “You make fun of Papa Poirot,
is it not so?” He shook his finger at me. “You do not trust his
grey cells? Ah, do not be confused! Let us discuss this little
problem—incomplete as yet, I admit, but already showing one or two
points of interest.”

“The lake!” I said significantly.

“And even more than the lake, the boathouse!”

I looked sidewise at Poirot. He was smiling in his most inscrutable
fashion. I felt that, for the moment, it would be quite useless to
question him further.

We heard nothing of Japp until the following evening, when he
walked in about nine o’clock. I saw at once by his expression that
he was bursting with news of some kind.

“_Eh bien_, my friend,” remarked Poirot. “All goes well? But do
not tell me that you have discovered the body of Mr. Davenheim in
your lake, because I shall not believe you.”

“We haven’t found the body, but we did find his _clothes_—the
identical clothes he was wearing that day. What do you say to
that?”

“Any other clothes missing from the house?”

“No, his valet is quite positive on that point. The rest of his
wardrobe is intact. There’s more. We’ve arrested Lowen. One of the
maids, whose business it is to fasten the bedroom windows, declares
that she saw Lowen coming _towards_ the study through the
rose-garden about a quarter past six. That would be about ten
minutes before he left the house.”

“What does he himself say to that?”

“Denied first of all that he had ever left the study. But the maid
was positive, and he pretended afterwards that he had forgotten
just stepping out of the window to examine an unusual species of
rose. Rather a weak story! And there’s fresh evidence against him
come to light. Mr. Davenheim always wore a thick gold ring set with
a solitaire diamond on the little finger of his right hand. Well,
that ring was pawned in London on Saturday night by a man called
Billy Kellett! He’s already known to the police—did three months
last autumn for lifting an old gentleman’s watch. It seems he tried
to pawn the ring at no less than five different places, succeeded
at the last one, got gloriously drunk on the proceeds, assaulted
a policeman, and was run in in consequence. I went to Bow Street
with Miller and saw him. He’s sober enough now, and I don’t mind
admitting we pretty well frightened the life out of him, hinting
he might be charged with murder. This is his yarn, and a very queer
one it is.

“He was at Entfield races on Saturday, though I dare say scarfpins
was his line of business, rather than betting. Anyway, he had a
bad day, and was down on his luck. He was tramping along the road
to Chingside, and sat down in a ditch to rest just before he got
into the village. A few minutes later he noticed a man coming along
the road to the village, ‘dark-complexioned gent, with a big
moustache, one of them city toffs,’ is his description of the man.

“Kellett was half concealed from the road by a heap of stones. Just
before he got abreast of him, the man looked quickly up and down
the road, and seeing it apparently deserted he took a small object
from his pocket and threw it over the hedge. Then he went on
towards the station. Now, the object he had thrown over the hedge
had fallen with a slight ‘chink’ which aroused the curiosity of
the human derelict in the ditch. He investigated and, after a short
search, discovered the ring! That is Kellett’s story. It’s only
fair to say that Lowen denies it utterly, and of course the word
of a man like Kellett can’t be relied upon in the slightest. It’s
within the bounds of possibility that he met Davenheim in the lane
and robbed and murdered him.”

Poirot shook his head.

“Very improbable, _mon ami_. He had no means of disposing of the
body. It would have been found by now. Secondly, the open way in
which he pawned the ring makes it unlikely that he did murder to
get it. Thirdly, your sneak-thief is rarely a murderer. Fourthly,
as he has been in prison since Saturday, it would be too much of
a coincidence that he is able to give so accurate a description of
Lowen.”

Japp nodded. “I don’t say you’re not right. But all the same, you
won’t get a jury to take much note of a jailbird’s evidence. What
seems odd to me is that Lowen couldn’t find a cleverer way of
disposing of the ring.”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. “Well, after all, if it were found
in the neighbourhood, it might be argued that Davenheim himself
had dropped it.”

“But why remove it from the body at all?” I cried.

“There might be a reason for that,” said Japp. “Do you know that
just beyond the lake, a little gate leads out on to the hill, and
not three minutes’ walk brings you to—what do you think?—a _lime
kiln_.”

“Good heavens!” I cried. “You mean that the lime which destroyed
the body would be powerless to affect the metal of the ring?”

“Exactly.”

“It seems to me,” I said, “that that explains everything. What a
horrible crime!”

By common consent we both turned and looked at Poirot. He seemed
lost in reflection, his brow knitted, as though with some supreme
mental effort. I felt that at last his keen intellect was asserting
itself. What would his first words be? We were not long left in
doubt. With a sigh, the tension of his attitude relaxed, and
turning to Japp, he asked:

“Have you any idea, my friend, whether Mr. and Mrs. Davenheim
occupied the same bedroom?”

The question seemed so ludicrously inappropriate that for a moment
we both stared in silence. Then Japp burst into a laugh. “Good
Lord, Monsieur Poirot, I thought you were coming out with something
startling. As to your question, I’m sure I don’t know.”

“You could find out?” asked Poirot with curious persistence.

“Oh, certainly—if you _really_ want to know.”

“_Merci, mon ami_. I should be obliged if you would make a point
of it.”

Japp stared at him a few minutes longer, but Poirot seemed to have
forgotten us both. The detective shook his head sadly at me, and
murmuring, “Poor old fellow! War’s been too much for him!” gently
withdrew from the room.

As Poirot still seemed sunk in a daydream, I took a sheet of paper,
and amused myself by scribbling notes upon it. My friend’s voice
aroused me. He had come out of his reverie, and was looking brisk
and alert.

“_Que faites-vous là, mon ami?_”

“I was jotting down what occurred to me as the main points of
interest in this affair.”

“You become methodical—at last!” said Poirot approvingly.

I concealed my pleasure. “Shall I read them to you?”

“By all means.”

I cleared my throat.

“‘One: All the evidence points to Lowen having been the man who
forced the safe.

“‘Two: He had a grudge against Davenheim.

“‘Three: He lied in his first statement that he had never left the
study.

“‘Four: If you accept Billy Kellett’s story as true, Lowen is
unmistakably implicated.’”

I paused. “Well?” I asked, for I felt that I had put my finger on
all the vital facts.

Poirot looked at me pityingly, shaking his head very gently. “_Mon
pauvre ami!_ But it is that you have not the gift! The important
detail, you appreciate him never! Also, your reasoning is false.”

“How?”

“Let me take your four points.

“One: Mr. Lowen could not possibly know that he would have the
chance to open the safe. He came for a business interview. He could
not know beforehand that Mr. Davenheim would be absent posting a
letter, and that he would consequently be alone in the study!”

“He might have seized his opportunity,” I suggested.

“And the tools? City gentlemen do not carry round housebreaker’s
tools on the off chance! And one could not cut into that safe with
a penknife, _bien entendu_!”

“Well, what about Number Two?”

“You say Lowen had a grudge against Mr. Davenheim. What you mean
is that he had once or twice got the better of him. And presumably
those transactions were entered into with the view of benefiting
himself. In any case you do not as a rule bear a grudge against a
man you have got the better of—it is more likely to be the other
way about. Whatever grudge there might have been would have been
on Mr. Davenheim’s side.”

“Well, you can’t deny that he lied about never having left the
study?”

“No. But he may have been frightened. Remember, the missing man’s
clothes had just been discovered in the lake. Of course, as usual,
he would have done better to speak the truth.”

“And the fourth point?”

“I grant you that. If Kellett’s story is true, Lowen is undeniably
implicated. That is what makes the affair so very interesting.”

“Then I did appreciate _one_ vital fact?”

“Perhaps—but you have entirely overlooked the two most important
points, the ones which undoubtedly hold the clue to the whole
matter.”

“And pray, what are they?”

“One, the passion which has grown upon Mr. Davenheim in the last
few years for buying jewellery. Two, his trip to Buenos Ayres last
autumn.”

“Poirot, you are joking!”

“I am most serious. Ah, sacred thunder, but I hope Japp will not
forget my little commission.”

But the detective, entering into the spirit of the joke, had
remembered it so well that a telegram was handed to Poirot about
eleven o’clock the next day. At his request I opened it and read
it out:

“‘Husband and wife have occupied separate rooms since last winter.’”

“Aha!” cried Poirot. “And now we are in mid June! All is solved!”

I stared at him.

“You have no moneys in the bank of Davenheim and Salmon, _mon
ami_?”

“No,” I said, wondering. “Why?”

“Because I should advise you to withdraw it—before it is too
late.”

“Why, what do you expect?”

“I expect a big smash in a few days—perhaps sooner. Which reminds
me, we will return the compliment of a _dépêche_ to Japp. A pencil,
I pray you, and a form. _Voilà!_ ‘Advise you to withdraw any money
deposited with firm in question.’ That will intrigue him, the good
Japp! His eyes will open wide—wide! He will not comprehend in the
slightest—until to-morrow, or the next day!”

I remained sceptical, but the morrow forced me to render tribute
to my friend’s remarkable powers. In every paper was a huge headline
telling of the sensational failure of the Davenheim bank. The
disappearance of the famous financier took on a totally different
aspect in the light of the revelation of the financial affairs of
the bank.

Before we were half-way through breakfast, the door flew open and
Japp rushed in. In his left hand was a paper; in his right was
Poirot’s telegram, which he banged down on the table in front of
my friend.

“How did you know, Monsieur Poirot? How the blazes could you know?”

Poirot smiled placidly at him. “Ah, _mon ami_, after your wire, it
was a certainty! From the commencement, see you, it struck me that
the safe burglary was somewhat remarkable. Jewels, ready money,
bearer bonds—all so conveniently arranged for—whom? Well, the good
Monsieur Davenheim was of those who ‘look after Number One’ as your
saying goes! It seemed almost certain that it was arranged
for—himself! Then his passion of late years for buying jewellery!
How simple! The funds he embezzled, he converted into jewels, very
likely replacing them in turn with paste duplicates, and so he put
away in a safe place, under another name, a considerable fortune
to be enjoyed all in good time when every one has been thrown off
the track. His arrangements completed, he makes an appointment with
Mr. Lowen (who has been imprudent enough in the past to cross the
great man once or twice), drills a hole in the safe, leaves orders
that the guest is to be shown into the study, and walks out of the
house—where?” Poirot stopped, and stretched out his hand for
another boiled egg. He frowned. “It is really insupportable,” he
murmured, “that every hen lays an egg of a different size! What
symmetry can there be on the breakfast table? At least they should
sort them in dozens at the shop!”

“Never mind the eggs,” said Japp impatiently. “Let ’em lay ’em
square if they like. Tell us where our customer went to when he
left The Cedars—that is, if you know!”

“_Eh bien_, he went to his hiding-place. Ah, this Monsieur
Davenheim, there may be some malformation in his grey cells, but
they are of the first quality!”

“Do you know where he is hiding?”

“Certainly! It is most ingenious.”

“For the Lord’s sake, tell us, then!”

Poirot gently collected every fragment of shell from his plate,
placed them in the egg-cup, and reversed the empty egg-shell on
top of them. This little operation concluded, he smiled on the neat
effect, and then beamed affectionately on us both.

“Come, my friends, you are men of intelligence. Ask yourselves the
question which I asked myself. ‘If I were this man, where should
_I_ hide?’ Hastings, what do you say?”

“Well,” I said, “I’m rather inclined to think I’d not do a bolt at
all. I’d stay in London—in the heart of things, travel by tubes
and buses; ten to one I’d never be recognized. There’s safety in
a crowd.”

Poirot turned inquiringly to Japp.

“I don’t agree. Get clear away at once—that’s the only chance. I
would have had plenty of time to prepare things beforehand. I’d
have a yacht waiting, with steam up, and I’d be off to one of the
most out-of-the-way corners of the world before the hue and cry
began!”

We both looked at Poirot. “What do _you_ say, monsieur?”

For a moment he remained silent. Then a very curious smile flitted
across his face.

“My friends, if _I_ were hiding from the police, do you know
_where_ I should hide? _In a prison!_”

“_What?_”

“You are seeking Monsieur Davenheim in order to put him in prison,
so you never dream of looking to see if he may not be already
there!”

“What do you mean?”

“You tell me Madame Davenheim is not a very intelligent woman.
Nevertheless I think that if you took her to Bow Street and
confronted her with the man Billy Kellett, she would recognize him!
In spite of the fact that he has shaved his beard and moustache
and those bushy eyebrows, and has cropped his hair close. A woman
nearly always knows her husband, though the rest of the world may
be deceived!”

“Billy Kellett? But he’s known to the police!”

“Did I not tell you Davenheim was a clever man? He prepared his
alibi long beforehand. He was not in Buenos Ayres last autumn—he
was creating the character of Billy Kellett, ‘doing three months,’
so that the police should have no suspicions when the time came.
He was playing, remember, for a large fortune, as well as liberty.
It was worth while doing the thing thoroughly. Only——”

“Yes?”

“_Eh bien_, afterwards he had to wear a false beard and wig, had
to _make up as himself_ again, and to sleep with a false beard is
not easy—it invites detection! He cannot risk continuing to share
the chamber of madame his wife. You found out for me that for the
last six months, or ever since his supposed return from Buenos
Ayres, he and Mrs. Davenheim occupied separate rooms. Then I was
sure! Everything fitted in. The gardener who fancied he saw his
master going round to the side of the house was quite right. He
went to the boathouse, donned his ‘tramp’ clothes, which you may
be sure had been safely hidden from the eyes of his valet, dropped
the others in the lake, and proceeded to carry out his plan by
pawning the ring in an obvious manner, and then assaulting a
policeman, getting himself safely into the haven of Bow Street,
where nobody would ever dream of looking for him!”

“It’s impossible,” murmured Japp.

“Ask Madame,” said my friend, smiling.

The next day a registered letter lay beside Poirot’s plate. He
opened it, and a five-pound note fluttered out. My friend’s brow
puckered.

“_Ah, sacré!_ But what shall I do with it? I have much remorse!
_Ce pauvre Japp_! Ah, an idea! We will have a little dinner, we
three! That consoles me. It was really too easy. I am ashamed. I,
who would not rob a child—_mille tonnerres! Mon ami_, what have
you, that you laugh so heartily?”




  X


  The Adventure of the Italian Nobleman


Poirot and I had many friends and acquaintances of an informal
nature. Amongst these was to be numbered Dr. Hawker, a near
neighbour of ours, and a member of the medical profession. It was
the genial doctor’s habit to drop in sometimes of an evening and
have a chat with Poirot, of whose genius he was an ardent admirer.
The doctor himself, frank and unsuspicious to the last degree,
admired the talents so far removed from his own.

On one particular evening in early June, he arrived about half-past
eight and settled down to a comfortable discussion on the cheery
topic of the prevalence of arsenical poisoning in crimes. It must
have been about a quarter of an hour later when the door of our
sitting-room flew open, and a distracted female precipitated
herself into the room.

“Oh, doctor, you’re wanted! Such a terrible voice. It gave me a
turn, it did indeed.”

I recognized in our new visitor Dr. Hawker’s housekeeper, Miss
Rider. The doctor was a bachelor, and lived in a gloomy old house
a few streets away. The usually placid Miss Rider was now in a
state bordering on incoherence.

“What terrible voice? Who is it, and what’s the trouble?”

“It was the telephone, doctor. I answered it—and a voice spoke.
‘Help,’ it said. ‘Doctor—help. They’ve killed me!’ Then it sort of
tailed away. ‘Who’s speaking?’ I said. ‘Who’s speaking?’ Then I
got a reply, just a whisper, it seemed, ‘Foscatine’—something like
that—‘Regent’s Court.’”

The doctor uttered an exclamation.

“Count Foscatini. He has a flat in Regent’s Court. I must go at
once. What can have happened?”

“A patient of yours?” asked Poirot.

“I attended him for some slight ailment a few weeks ago. An Italian,
but he speaks English perfectly. Well, I must wish you good night,
Monsieur Poirot, unless——” He hesitated.

“I perceive the thought in your mind,” said Poirot, smiling. “I
shall be delighted to accompany you. Hastings, run down and get
hold of a taxi.”

Taxis always make themselves sought for when one is particularly
pressed for time, but I captured one at last, and we were soon
bowling along in the direction of Regent’s Park. Regent’s Court
was a new block of flats, situated just off St. John’s Wood Road.
They had only recently been built, and contained the latest service
devices.

There was no one in the hall. The doctor pressed the lift-bell
impatiently, and when the lift arrived questioned the uniformed
attendant sharply.

“Flat II. Count Foscatini. There’s been an accident there, I
understand.”

The man stared at him.

“First I’ve heard of it. Mr. Graves—that’s Count Foscatini’s
man—went out about half an hour ago, and he said nothing.”

“Is the Count alone in the flat?”

“No, sir, he’s got two gentlemen dining with him.”

“What are they like?” I asked eagerly.

We were in the lift now, ascending rapidly to the second floor, on
which Flat II was situated.

“I didn’t see them myself, sir, but I understand that they were
foreign gentlemen.”

He pulled back the iron door, and we stepped out on the landing.
No. II was opposite to us. The doctor rang the bell. There was no
reply, and we could hear no sound from within. The doctor rang
again and again; we could hear the bell trilling within, but no
sign of life rewarded us.

“This is getting serious,” muttered the doctor. He turned to the
lift attendant.

“Is there any pass-key to this door?”

“There is one in the porter’s office downstairs.”

“Get it, then, and, look here, I think you’d better send for the
police.”

Poirot approved with a nod of the head.

The man returned shortly; with him came the manager.

“Will you tell me, gentlemen, what is the meaning of all this?”

“Certainly. I received a telephone message from Count Foscatini
stating that he had been attacked and was dying. You can understand
that we must lose no time—if we are not already too late.”

The manager produced the key without more ado, and we all entered
the flat.

We passed first into a small square lounge hall. A door on the
right of it was half open. The manager indicated it with a nod.

“The dining-room.”

Dr. Hawker led the way. We followed close on his heels. As we
entered the room I gave a gasp. The round table in the centre bore
the remains of a meal; three chairs were pushed back, as though
their occupants had just risen. In the corner, to the right of the
fire-place, was a big writing-table, and sitting at it was a man—or
what had been a man. His right hand still grasped the base of the
telephone, but he had fallen forward, struck down by a terrific
blow on the head from behind. The weapon was not far to seek. A
marble statuette stood where it had been hurriedly put down, the
base of it stained with blood.

The doctor’s examination did not take a minute. “Stone dead. Must
have been almost instantaneous. I wonder he even managed to
telephone. It will be better not to move him until the police
arrive.”

On the manager’s suggestion we searched the flat, but the result
was a foregone conclusion. It was not likely that the murderers
would be concealed there when all they had to do was to walk out.

We came back to the dining-room. Poirot had not accompanied us in
our tour. I found him studying the centre table with close
attention. I joined him. It was a well-polished round mahogany
table. A bowl of roses decorated the centre, and white lace mats
reposed on the gleaming surface. There was a dish of fruit, but
the three dessert plates were untouched. There were three
coffee-cups with remains of coffee in them—two black, one with
milk. All three men had taken port, and the decanter, half-full,
stood before the centre plate. One of the men had smoked a cigar,
the other two cigarettes. A tortoiseshell-and-silver box, holding
cigars and cigarettes, stood open upon the table.

I enumerated all these facts to myself, but I was forced to admit
that they did not shed any brilliant light on the situation. I
wondered what Poirot saw in them to make him so intent. I asked
him.

“_Mon ami_,” he replied, “you miss the point. I am looking for
something that I do _not_ see.”

“What is that?”

“A mistake—even a little mistake—on the part of the murderer.”

He stepped swiftly to the small adjoining kitchen, looked in, and
shook his head.

“Monsieur,” he said to the manager, “explain to me, I pray, your
system of serving meals here.”

The manager stepped to a small hatch in the wall.

“This is the service lift,” he explained. “It runs to the kitchens
at the top of the building. You order through this telephone, and
the dishes are sent down in the lift, one course at a time. The
dirty plates and dishes are sent up in the same manner. No domestic
worries, you understand, and at the same time you avoid the wearying
publicity of always dining in a restaurant.”

Poirot nodded.

“Then the plates and dishes that were used to-night are on high in
the kitchen. You permit that I mount there?”

“Oh, certainly, if you like! Roberts, the lift man, will take you
up and introduce you; but I’m afraid you won’t find anything that’s
of any use. They’re handling hundreds of plates and dishes, and
they’ll be all lumped together.”

Poirot remained firm, however, and together we visited the kitchens
and questioned the man who had taken the order from Flat II.

“The order was given from the _à la carte menu_—for three,” he
explained. “Soup julienne, filet de sole normande, tournedos of
beef, and a rice soufflé. What time? Just about eight o’clock, I
should say. No, I’m afraid the plates and dishes have been all
washed up by now. Unfortunate. You were thinking of finger-prints,
I suppose?”

“Not exactly,” said Poirot, with an enigmatical smile. “I am more
interested in Count Foscatini’s appetite. Did he partake of every
dish?”

“Yes; but of course I can’t say how much of each he ate. The plates
were all soiled, and the dishes empty—that is to say, with the
exception of the rice soufflé. There was a fair amount of that
left.”

“Ah!” said Poirot, and seemed satisfied with the fact.

As we descended to the flat again he remarked in a low tone:

“We have decidedly to do with a man of method.”

“Do you mean the murderer, or Count Foscatini?”

“The latter was undoubtedly an orderly gentleman. After imploring
help and announcing his approaching demise, he carefully hung up
the telephone receiver.”

I stared at Poirot. His words now and his recent inquiries gave me
the glimmering of an idea.

“You suspect poison?” I breathed. “The blow on the head was a
blind.”

Poirot merely smiled.

We re-entered the flat to find the local inspector of police had
arrived with two constables. He was inclined to resent our
appearance, but Poirot calmed him with the mention of our Scotland
Yard friend, Inspector Japp, and we were accorded a grudging
permission to remain. It was a lucky thing we were, for we had not
been back five minutes before an agitated middle-aged man came
rushing into the room with every appearance of grief and agitation.

This was Graves, valet-butler to the late Count Foscatini. The
story he had to tell was a sensational one.

On the previous morning, two gentlemen had called to see his
master. They were Italians, and the elder of the two, a man of
about forty, gave his name as Signor Ascanio. The younger was a
well-dressed lad of about twenty-four.

Count Foscatini was evidently prepared for their visit and
immediately sent Graves out upon some trivial errand. Here the man
paused and hesitated in his story. In the end, however, he admitted
that, curious as to the purport of the interview, he had not obeyed
immediately, but had lingered about endeavouring to hear something
of what was going on.

The conversation was carried on in so low a tone that he was not
as successful as he had hoped; but he gathered enough to make it
clear that some kind of monetary proposition was being discussed,
and that the basis of it was a threat. The discussion was anything
but amicable. In the end, Count Foscatini raised his voice slightly,
and the listener heard these words clearly:

“I have no time to argue further now, gentlemen. If you will dine
with me to-morrow night at eight o’clock, we will resume the
discussion.”

Afraid of being discovered listening, Graves had then hurried out
to do his master’s errand. This evening the two men had arrived
punctually at eight. During dinner they had talked of indifferent
matters—politics, the weather, and the theatrical world. When
Graves had placed the port upon the table and brought in the coffee
his master told him that he might have the evening off.

“Was that a usual proceeding of his when he had guests?” asked the
inspector.

“No, sir; it wasn’t. That’s what made me think it must be some
business of a very unusual kind that he was going to discuss with
these gentlemen.”

That finished Graves’s story. He had gone out about 8.30, and,
meeting a friend, had accompanied him to the Metropolitan Music
Hall in Edgware Road.

Nobody had seen the two men leave, but the time of the murder was
fixed clearly enough at 8.47. A small clock on the writing-table
had been swept off by Foscatini’s arm, and had stopped at that
hour, which agreed with Miss Rider’s telephone summons.

The police surgeon had made his examination of the body, and it
was now lying on the couch. I saw the face for the first time—the
olive complexion, the long nose, the luxuriant black moustache,
and the full red lips drawn back from the dazzlingly white teeth.
Not altogether a pleasant face.

“Well,” said the inspector, refastening his notebook. “The case
seems clear enough. The only difficulty will be to lay our hands
on this Signor Ascanio. I suppose his address is not in the dead
man’s pocket-book by any chance?”

As Poirot had said, the late Foscatini was an orderly man. Neatly
written in small, precise handwriting was the inscription, “Signor
Paolo Ascanio, Grosvenor Hotel.”

The inspector busied himself with the telephone, then turned to us
with a grin.

“Just in time. Our fine gentleman was off to catch the boat train
to the Continong. Well, gentlemen, that’s about all we can do here.
It’s a bad business, but straightforward enough. One of these
Italian vendetta things, as likely as not.”

Thus airily dismissed, we found our way downstairs. Dr. Hawker was
full of excitement.

“Like the beginning of a novel, eh? Real exciting stuff. Wouldn’t
believe it if you read about it.”

Poirot did not speak. He was very thoughtful. All the evening he
had hardly opened his lips.

“What says the master detective, eh?” asked Hawker, clapping him
on the back. “Nothing to work your grey cells over this time.”

“You think not?”

“What could there be?”

“Well, for example, there is the window.”

“The window? But it was fastened. Nobody could have got out or in
that way. I noticed it specially.”

“And why were you able to notice it?”

The doctor looked puzzled. Poirot hastened to explain.

“It is to the curtains I refer. They were not drawn. A little odd,
that. And then there was the coffee. It was very black coffee.”

“Well, what of it?”

“Very black,” repeated Poirot. “In conjunction with that let us
remember that very little of the rice soufflé was eaten, and we
get—what?”

“Moonshine,” laughed the doctor. “You’re pulling my leg.”

“Never do I pull the leg. Hastings here knows that I am perfectly
serious.”

“I don’t know what you are getting at, all the same,” I confessed.
“You don’t suspect the manservant, do you? He might have been in
with the gang, and put some dope in the coffee. I suppose they’ll
test his alibi?”

“Without doubt, my friend; but it is the alibi of Signor Ascanio
that interests me.”

“You think he has an alibi?”

“That is just what worries me. I have no doubt that we shall soon
be enlightened on that point.”

The _Daily Newsmonger_ enabled us to become conversant with
succeeding events.

Signor Ascanio was arrested and charged with the murder of Count
Foscatini. When arrested, he denied knowing the Count, and declared
he had never been near Regent’s Court either on the evening of the
crime or on the previous morning. The younger man had disappeared
entirely. Signor Ascanio had arrived alone at the Grosvenor Hotel
from the Continent two days before the murder. All efforts to trace
the second man failed.

Ascanio, however, was not sent for trial. No less a personage than
the Italian Ambassador himself came forward and testified at the
police-court proceedings that Ascanio had been with him at the
Embassy from eight till nine that evening. The prisoner was
discharged. Naturally, a lot of people thought that the crime was
a political one, and was being deliberately hushed up.

Poirot had taken a keen interest in all these points. Nevertheless,
I was somewhat surprised when he suddenly informed me one morning
that he was expecting a visitor at eleven o’clock, and that that
visitor was none other than Ascanio himself.

“He wishes to consult you?”

“_Du tout_, Hastings. I wish to consult him.”

“What about?”

“The Regent’s Court murder.”

“You are going to prove that he did it?”

“A man cannot be tried twice for murder, Hastings. Endeavour to
have the common sense. Ah, that is our friend’s ring.”

A few minutes later Signor Ascanio was ushered in—a small, thin
man with a secretive and furtive glance in his eyes. He remained
standing, darting suspicious glances from one to the other of us.

“Monsieur Poirot?”

My little friend tapped himself gently on the chest.

“Be seated, signor. You received my note. I am determined to get
to the bottom of this mystery. In some small measure you can aid
me. Let us commence. You—in company with a friend—visited the late
Count Foscatini on the morning of Tuesday the 9th——”

The Italian made an angry gesture.

“I did nothing of the sort. I have sworn in court——”

“_Précisément_—and I have a little idea that you have sworn
falsely.”

“You threaten me? Bah! I have nothing to fear from you. I have been
acquitted.”

“Exactly; and as I am not an imbecile, it is not with the gallows
I threaten you—but with publicity. Publicity! I see that you do
not like the word. I had an idea that you would not. My little
ideas, you know, they are very valuable to me. Come, signor, your
only chance is to be frank with me. I do not ask to know whose
indiscretions brought you to England. I know this much, you came
for the especial purpose of seeing Count Foscatini.”

“He was not a count,” growled the Italian.

“I have already noted the fact that his name does not appear in
the _Almanach de Gotha_. Never mind, the title of count is often
useful in the profession of blackmailing.”

“I suppose I might as well be frank. You seem to know a good deal.”

“I have employed my grey cells to some advantage. Come, Signor
Ascanio, you visited the dead man on the Tuesday morning—that is
so, is it not?”

“Yes; but I never went there on the following evening. There was
no need. I will tell you all. Certain information concerning a man
of great position in Italy had come into this scoundrel’s
possession. He demanded a big sum of money in return for the
papers. I came over to England to arrange the matter. I called upon
him by appointment that morning. One of the young secretaries of
the Embassy was with me. The Count was more reasonable than I had
hoped, although even then the sum of money I paid him was a huge
one.”

“Pardon, how was it paid?”

“In Italian notes of comparatively small denomination. I paid over
the money then and there. He handed me the incriminating papers.
I never saw him again.”

“Why did you not say all this when you were arrested?”

“In my delicate position I was forced to deny any association with
the man.”

“And how do you account for the events of the evening, then?”

“I can only think that some one must have deliberately impersonated
me. I understand that no money was found in the flat.”

Poirot looked at him and shook his head.

“Strange,” he murmured. “We all have the little grey cells. And so
few of us know how to use them. Good morning, Signor Ascanio. I
believe your story. It is very much as I had imagined. But I had
to make sure.”

After bowing his guest out, Poirot returned to his arm-chair and
smiled at me.

“Let us hear M. le Capitaine Hastings on the case?”

“Well, I suppose Ascanio is right—somebody impersonated him.”

“Never, never will you use the brains the good God has given you.
Recall to yourself some words I uttered after leaving the flat that
night. I referred to the window-curtains not being drawn. We are
in the month of June. It is still light at eight o’clock. The light
is failing by half-past. _Ça vous dit quelque chose?_ I perceive
a struggling impression that you will arrive some day. Now let us
continue. The coffee was, as I said, very black. Count Foscatini’s
teeth were magnificently white. Coffee stains the teeth. We reason
from that that Count Foscatini did not drink any coffee. Yet there
was coffee in all three cups. Why should anyone pretend Count
Foscatini had drunk coffee when he had not done so?”

I shook my head, utterly bewildered.

“Come, I will help you. What evidence have we that Ascanio and his
friend, or two men posing as them, ever came to the flat that
night? Nobody saw them go in; nobody saw them go out. We have the
evidence of one man and of a host of inanimate objects.”

“You mean?”

“I mean knives and forks and plates and empty dishes. Ah, but it
was a clever idea! Graves is a thief and a scoundrel, but what a
man of method! He overhears a portion of the conversation in the
morning, enough to realize that Ascanio will be in awkward position
to defend himself. The following evening, about eight o’clock, he
tells his master he is wanted at the telephone. Foscatini sits
down, stretches out his hand to the telephone, and from behind
Graves strikes him down with the marble figure. Then quickly to
the service telephone—dinner for three! It comes, he lays the
table, dirties the plates, knives, and forks, etc. But he has to
get rid of the food too. Not only is he a man of brain; he has a
resolute and capacious stomach! But after eating three tournedos,
the rice soufflé is too much for him! He even smokes a cigar and
two cigarettes to carry out the illusion. Ah, but it was
magnificently thorough! Then, having moved on the hands of the
clock to 8.47, he smashes it and stops it. The one thing he does
not do is to draw the curtains. But if there had been a real dinner
party the curtains would have been drawn as soon as the light began
to fail. Then he hurries out, mentioning the guests to the lift
man in passing. He hurries to a telephone box, and as near as
possible to 8.47 rings up the doctor with his master’s dying cry.
So successful is his idea that no one ever inquires if a call was
put through from Flat II at that time.”

“Except Hercule Poirot, I suppose?” I said sarcastically.

“Not even Hercule Poirot,” said my friend, with a smile. “I am
about to inquire now. I had to prove my point to you first. But
you will see, I shall be right; and then Japp, to whom I have
already given a hint, will be able to arrest the respectable
Graves. I wonder how much of the money he has spent.”

Poirot _was_ right. He always is, confound him!




  XI


  The Case of the Missing Will


The problem presented to us by Miss Violet Marsh made rather a
pleasant change from our usual routine work. Poirot had received
a brisk and business-like note from the lady asking for an
appointment, and he had replied asking her to call upon him at
eleven o’clock the following day.

She arrived punctually—a tall, handsome young woman, plainly but
neatly dressed, with an assured and business-like manner. Clearly
a young woman who meant to get on in the world. I am not a great
admirer of the so-called New Woman myself, and, in spite of her
good looks, I was not particularly prepossessed in her favour.

“My business is of a somewhat unusual nature, Monsieur Poirot,”
she began, after she had accepted a chair. “I had better begin at
the beginning and tell you the whole story.”

“If you please, mademoiselle.”

“I am an orphan. My father was one of two brothers, sons of a small
yeoman farmer in Devonshire. The farm was a poor one, and the elder
brother, Andrew, emigrated to Australia, where he did very well
indeed, and by means of successful speculation in land became a
very rich man. The younger brother, Roger (my father), had no
leanings towards the agricultural life. He managed to educate
himself a little, and obtained a post as a clerk with a small firm.
He married slightly above him; my mother was the daughter of a poor
artist. My father died when I was six years old. When I was
fourteen, my mother followed him to the grave. My only living
relation then was my Uncle Andrew, who had recently returned from
Australia and bought a small place, Crabtree Manor, in his native
county. He was exceedingly kind to his brother’s orphan child, took
me to live with him, and treated me in every way as though I was
his own daughter.

“Crabtree Manor, in spite of its name, is really only an old
farmhouse. Farming was in my uncle’s blood, and he was intensely
interested in various modern farming experiments. Although kindness
itself to me, he had certain peculiar and deeply-rooted ideas as
to the up-bringing of women. Himself a man of little or no
education, though possessing remarkable shrewdness, he placed
little value on what he called ‘book knowledge.’ He was especially
opposed to the education of women. In his opinion, girls should
learn practical housework and dairy-work, be useful about the home,
and have as little to do with book learning as possible. He proposed
to bring me up on these lines, to my bitter disappointment and
annoyance. I rebelled frankly. I knew that I possessed a good
brain, and had absolutely no talent for domestic duties. My uncle
and I had many bitter arguments on the subject, for, though much
attached to each other, we were both self-willed. I was lucky
enough to win a scholarship, and up to a certain point was
successful in getting my own way. The crisis arose when I resolved
to go to Girton. I had a little money of my own, left me by my
mother, and I was quite determined to make the best use of the
gifts God had given me. I had one long, final argument with my
uncle. He put the facts plainly before me. He had no other
relations, and he had intended me to be his sole heiress. As I have
told you, he was a very rich man. If I persisted in these
‘new-fangled notions’ of mine, however, I need look for nothing
from him. I remained polite, but firm. I should always be deeply
attached to him, I told him, but I must lead my own life. We parted
on that note. ‘You fancy your brains, my girl,’ were his last
words. ‘I’ve no book learning, but, for all that, I’ll pit mine
against yours any day. We’ll see what we shall see.’

“That was nine years ago. I have stayed with him for a week-end
occasionally, and our relations were perfectly amicable, though
his views remained unaltered. He never referred to my having
matriculated, nor to my B.Sc. For the last three years his health
had been failing, and a month ago he died.

“I am now coming to the point of my visit. My uncle left a most
extraordinary will. By its terms, Crabtree Manor and its contents
are to be at my disposal for a year from his death—‘during which
time my clever niece may prove her wits,’ the actual words run. At
the end of that period, ‘my wits having proved better than hers,’
the house and all my uncle’s large fortune pass to various
charitable institutions.”

“That is a little hard on you, mademoiselle, seeing that you were
Mr. Marsh’s only blood relation.”

“I do not look on it in that way. Uncle Andrew warned me fairly,
and I chose my own path. Since I would not fall in with his wishes,
he was at perfect liberty to leave his money to whom he pleased.”

“Was the will drawn up by a lawyer?”

“No; it was written on a printed will-form and witnessed by the
man and his wife who live in the house and do for my uncle.”

“There might be a possibility of upsetting such a will?”

“I would not even attempt to do such a thing.”

“You regard it, then, as a sporting challenge on the part of your
uncle?”

“That is exactly how I look upon it.”

“It bears that interpretation, certainly,” said Poirot thoughtfully.
“Somewhere in this rambling old manor-house your uncle has concealed
either a sum of money in notes or possibly a second will, and has
given you a year in which to exercise your ingenuity to find it.”

“Exactly, Monsieur Poirot; and I am paying you the compliment of
assuming that your ingenuity will be greater than mine.”

“Eh, eh! but that is very charming of you. My grey cells are at
your disposal. You have made no search yourself?”

“Only a cursory one; but I have too much respect for my uncle’s
undoubted abilities to fancy that the task will be an easy one.”

“Have you the will or a copy of it with you?”

Miss Marsh handed a document across the table. Poirot ran through
it, nodding to himself.

“Made three years ago. Dated March 25; and the time is given
also—11 a.m.—that is very suggestive. It narrows the field of
search. Assuredly it is another will we have to seek for. A will
made even half-an-hour later would upset this. _Eh bien_,
mademoiselle, it is a problem charming and ingenious that you have
presented to me here. I shall have all the pleasure in the world
in solving it for you. Granted that your uncle was a man of ability,
his grey cells cannot have been of the quality of Hercule Poirot’s!”

(Really, Poirot’s vanity is blatant!)

“Fortunately, I have nothing of moment on hand at the minute.
Hastings and I will go down to Crabtree Manor to-night. The man
and wife who attended on your uncle are still there, I presume?”

“Yes, their name is Baker.”


  •   •   •   •   •   •   •


The following morning saw us started on the hunt proper. We had
arrived late the night before. Mr. and Mrs. Baker, having received
a telegram from Miss Marsh, were expecting us. They were a pleasant
couple, the man gnarled and pink-cheeked, like a shrivelled pippin,
and his wife a woman of vast proportions and true Devonshire calm.

Tired with our journey and the eight-mile drive from the station,
we had retired at once to bed after a supper of roast chicken,
apple pie, and Devonshire cream. We had now disposed of an excellent
breakfast, and were sitting in a small panelled room which had been
the late Mr. Marsh’s study and living-room. A roll-top desk stuffed
with papers, all neatly docketed, stood against the wall, and a
big leather armchair showed plainly that it had been its owner’s
constant resting-place. A big chintz-covered settee ran along the
opposite wall, and the deep low window seats were covered with the
same faded chintz of an old-fashioned pattern.

“_Eh bien, mon ami_,” said Poirot, lighting one of his tiny
cigarettes, “we must map out our plan of campaign. Already I have
made a rough survey of the house, but I am of opinion that any clue
will be found in this room. We shall have to go through the
documents in the desk with meticulous care. Naturally, I do not
expect to find the will amongst them; but it is likely that some
apparently innocent paper may conceal the clue to its hiding-place.
But first we must have a little information. Ring the bell, I pray
of you.”

I did so. While we were waiting for it to be answered, Poirot
walked up and down, looking about him approvingly.

“A man of method this Mr. Marsh. See how neatly the packets of
papers are docketed; then the key to each drawer has its ivory
label—so has the key of the china cabinet on the wall; and see
with what precision the china within is arranged. It rejoices the
heart. Nothing here offends the eye——”

He came to an abrupt pause, as his eye was caught by the key of
the desk itself, to which a dirty envelope was affixed. Poirot
frowned at it and withdrew it from the lock. On it were scrawled
the words: “Key of Roll Top Desk,” in a crabbed handwriting, quite
unlike the neat superscriptions on the other keys.

“An alien note,” said Poirot, frowning. “I could swear that here
we have no longer the personality of Mr. Marsh. But who else has
been in the house? Only Miss Marsh, and she, if I mistake not, is
also a young lady of method and order.”

Baker came in answer to the bell.

“Will you fetch madame your wife, and answer a few questions?”

Baker departed, and in a few moments returned with Mrs. Baker,
wiping her hands on her apron and beaming all over her face.

In a few clear words Poirot set forth the object of his mission.
The Bakers were immediately sympathetic.

“Us don’t want to see Miss Violet done out of what’s hers,” declared
the woman. “Cruel hard ’twould be for hospitals to get it all.”

Poirot proceeded with his questions. Yes, Mr. and Mrs. Baker
remembered perfectly witnessing the will. Baker had previously been
sent into the neighbouring town to get two printed will-forms.

“Two?” said Poirot sharply.

“Yes, sir, for safety like, I suppose, in case he should spoil
one—and sure enough, so he did do. Us had signed one——”

“What time of day was that?”

Baker scratched his head, but his wife was quicker.

“Why, to be sure, I’d just put the milk on for the cocoa at eleven.
Don’t ee remember? It had all boiled over on the stove when us got
back to kitchen.”

“And afterwards?”

“’Twould be about an hour later. Us had to go in again. ‘I’ve made
a mistake,’ says old master, ‘had to tear the whole thing up. I’ll
trouble you to sign again,’ and us did. And afterwards master give
us a tidy sum of money each. ‘I’ve left you nothing in my will,’
says he, ‘but each year I live you’ll have this to be a nest-egg
when I’m gone’; and sure enough, so he did.”

Poirot reflected.

“After you had signed the second time, what did Mr. Marsh do? Do
you know?”

“Went out to the village to pay tradesmen’s books.”

That did not seem very promising. Poirot tried another tack. He
held out the key of the desk.

“Is that your master’s writing?”

I may have imagined it, but I fancied that a moment or two elapsed
before Baker replied: “Yes, sir, it is.”

“He’s lying,” I thought. “But why?”

“Has your master let the house?—have there been any strangers in
it during the last three years?”

“No, sir.”

“No visitors?”

“Only Miss Violet.”

“No strangers of any kind been inside this room?”

“No, sir.”

“You forget the workmen, Jim,” his wife reminded him.

“Workmen?” Poirot wheeled round on her. “What workmen?”

The woman explained that about two years and a half ago workmen
had been in the house to do certain repairs. She was quite vague
as to what the repairs were. Her view seemed to be that the whole
thing was a fad of her master’s and quite unnecessary. Part of the
time the workmen had been in the study; but what they had done
there she could not say, as her master had not let either of them
into the room whilst the work was in progress. Unfortunately, they
could not remember the name of the firm employed, beyond the fact
that it was a Plymouth one.

“We progress, Hastings,” said Poirot, rubbing his hands as the
Bakers left the room. “Clearly he made a second will and then had
workmen from Plymouth in to make a suitable hiding-place. Instead
of wasting time taking up the floor and tapping the walls, we will
go to Plymouth.”

With a little trouble, we were able to get the information we
wanted. After one or two essays, we found the firm employed by Mr.
Marsh.

Their employees had all been with them many years, and it was easy
to find the two men who had worked under Mr. Marsh’s orders. They
remembered the job perfectly. Amongst various other minor jobs,
they had taken up one of the bricks of the old-fashioned fireplace,
made a cavity beneath, and so cut the brick that it was impossible
to see the join. By pressing on the second brick from the end, the
whole thing was raised. It had been quite a complicated piece of
work, and the old gentleman had been very fussy about it. Our
informant was a man called Coghan, a big, gaunt man with a grizzled
moustache. He seemed an intelligent fellow.

We returned to Crabtree Manor in high spirits, and, locking the
study door, proceeded to put our newly acquired knowledge into
effect. It was impossible to see any sign on the bricks, but when
we pressed in the manner indicated, a deep cavity was at once
disclosed.

Eagerly Poirot plunged in his hand. Suddenly his face fell from
complacent elation to consternation. All he held was a charred
fragment of stiff paper. But for it, the cavity was empty.

“_Sacré!_” cried Poirot angrily. “Some one has been before us.”

We examined the scrap of paper anxiously. Clearly it was a fragment
of what we sought. A portion of Baker’s signature remained, but no
indication of what the terms of the will had been.

Poirot sat back on his heels. His expression would have been
comical if we had not been so overcome.

“I understand it not,” he growled. “Who destroyed this? And what
was their object?”

“The Bakers?” I suggested.

“_Pourquoi?_ Neither will makes any provision for them, and they
are more likely to be kept on with Miss Marsh than if the place
became the property of a hospital. How could it be to anyone’s
advantage to destroy the will? The hospitals benefit—yes; but one
cannot suspect institutions.”

“Perhaps the old man changed his mind and destroyed it himself,”
I suggested.

Poirot rose to his feet, dusting his knees with his usual care.

“That may be,” he admitted. “One of your more sensible observations,
Hastings. Well, we can do no more here. We have done all that
mortal man can do. We have successfully pitted our wits against
the late Andrew Marsh’s; but, unfortunately, his niece is no better
off for our success.”

By driving to the station at once, we were just able to catch a
train to London, though not the principal express. Poirot was sad
and dissatisfied. For my part, I was tired and dozed in a corner.
Suddenly, as we were just moving out of Taunton, Poirot uttered a
piercing squeal.

“_Vite_, Hastings! Awake and jump! But jump I say!”

Before I knew where I was we were standing on the platform,
bareheaded and minus our valises, whilst the train disappeared into
the night. I was furious. But Poirot paid no attention.

“Imbecile that I have been!” he cried. “Triple imbecile! Not again
will I vaunt my little grey cells!”

“That’s a good job at any rate,” I said grumpily. “But what is this
all about?”

As usual, when following out his own ideas, Poirot paid absolutely
no attention to me.

“The tradesmen’s books—I have left them entirely out of account!
Yes, but where? Where? Never mind, I cannot be mistaken. We must
return at once.”

Easier said than done. We managed to get a slow train to Exeter,
and there Poirot hired a car. We arrived back at Crabtree Manor in
the small hours of the morning. I pass over the bewilderment of
the Bakers when we had at last aroused them. Paying no attention
to anybody, Poirot strode at once to the study.

“I have been, not a triple imbecile, but thirty-six times one, my
friend,” he deigned to remark. “Now, behold!”

Going straight to the desk, he drew out the key, and detached the
envelope from it. I stared at him stupidly. How could he possibly
hope to find a big will-form in that tiny envelope? With great care
he cut open the envelope, laying it out flat. Then he lighted the
fire and held the plain inside surface of the envelope to the
flame. In a few minutes faint characters began to appear.

“Look, _mon ami_!” cried Poirot in triumph.

I looked. There were just a few lines of faint writing stating
briefly that he left everything to his niece, Violet Marsh. It was
dated March 25, 12.30 p.m., and witnessed by Albert Pike,
confectioner, and Jessie Pike, married woman.

“But is it legal?” I gasped.

“As far as I know, there is no law against writing your will in a
blend of disappearing and sympathetic ink. The intention of the
testator is clear, and the beneficiary is his only living relation.
But the cleverness of him! He foresaw every step that a searcher
would take—that I, miserable imbecile, took. He gets two will-forms,
makes the servants sign twice, then sallies out with his will
written on the inside of a dirty envelope and a fountain-pen
containing his little ink mixture. On some excuse he gets the
confectioner and his wife to sign their names under his own
signature, then he ties it to the key of his desk and chuckles to
himself. If his niece sees through his little ruse, she will have
justified her choice of life and elaborate education, and be
thoroughly welcome to his money.”

“She didn’t see through it, did she?” I said slowly. “It seems
rather unfair. The old man really won.”

“But no, Hastings. It is _your_ wits that go astray. Miss Marsh
proved the astuteness of her wits and the value of the higher
education for women by at once putting the matter in _my_ hands.
Always employ the expert. She has amply proved her right to the
money.”

I wonder—I very much wonder—what old Andrew Marsh would have
thought!


  THE END











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POIROT INVESTIGATES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Hunter's Lodge Case
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Hunter's Lodge Case

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: January 14, 2022 [eBook #67160]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Consolidated Magazines Corporation (The Blue Book Magazine), 1924

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNTER'S LODGE CASE ***

                       The Hunter’s Lodge Case
                          by Agatha Christie


[Illustration]

    The famous “little gray cells” of the great detective
    Poirot function admirably in solving what at first seems a
    particularly puzzling murder mystery.


“After all,” murmured Poirot, “it is possible that I shall not die
this time.”

Coming from a convalescent influenza patient, I hailed the remark as
showing a beneficial optimism. I myself had been the first sufferer
from the disease. Poirot in his turn had gone down. He was now sitting
up in bed, propped up with pillows.

“Yes, yes,” my little friend continued. “Once more shall I be myself
again, the great Hercule Poirot, the terror of evildoers! Figure to
yourself, _mon ami_, that I have a little paragraph to myself in
_Society Gossip_. But yes! Here it is!

“‘Go it, criminals—all out! Hercule Poirot,—and believe me, girls,
he’s some Hercules!—our own pet society detective can’t get a grip on
you. ’Cause why? ’Cause he’s got _la grippe_ himself!’”

I laughed.

“Good for you, Poirot. You are becoming quite a public character. And
fortunately you haven’t missed anything of particular interest during
this time.”

“That is true. The few cases I have had to decline did not fill me
with any regret.”

Our landlady stuck her head in at the door.

“There’s a gentleman downstairs. Says he must see M. Poirot or you,
Captain. Seeing as he was in a great to-do,—and with all that quite
the gentleman,—I brought up ’is card.”

She handed me the bit of pasteboard. “‘Hon. Roger Havering,’” I read.

Poirot motioned with his head toward the bookcase, and I obediently
pulled forth the “Who’s Who.” Poirot took it from me and scanned the
pages rapidly.

“Second son of fifth Baron Windsor. Married 1913 Zoe, fourth daughter
of William Crabb.”

“H’m,” I said. “I rather fancy that’s the girl who used to act at the
Frivolity—only she called herself Zoe Carrisbrook. I remember she
married some young man about town just before the war.”

“Would it interest you, Hastings, to go down and hear what our
visitor’s particular trouble is? Make him all my excuses.”

Roger Havering was a man of about forty, well set up and of smart
appearance.

His face, however, was haggard, and he was evidently laboring under
great agitation.

“Captain Hastings? You are M. Poirot’s partner, I understand. It is
imperative that he should come with me to Derbyshire today.”

“I’m afraid that’s impossible,” I replied. “Poirot is ill in
bed—influenza.”

His face fell.

“Dear me, that is a great blow to me.”

“The matter on which you want to consult him is serious?”

“My God, yes! My uncle, the best friend I have in the world, was
foully murdered last night.”

“Here in London?”

“No, in Derbyshire. I was in town and received a telegram from my wife
this morning. Immediately upon its receipt I determined to come round
and beg M. Poirot to undertake the case.”

“If you will excuse me a minute,” I said, struck by a sudden idea.

I rushed upstairs, and in few brief words acquainted Poirot with the
situation. He took any further words out of my mouth.

“I see—I see. You want to go yourself, is it not so? Well, why not?
You should know my methods by now. All I ask is that you should report
to me fully every day, and follow implicitly any instructions I may
wire you.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

To this I willingly agreed, and an hour later I was sitting opposite
Mr. Havering in a first-class carriage on the Midland Railway,
speeding rapidly away from London.

“To begin with, Captain Hastings, you must understand that Hunter’s
Lodge, where we are going, and where the tragedy took place, is only a
small shooting-box in the heart of the Derbyshire moors. Our real home
is near Newmarket, and we usually rent a flat in town for the season.
Hunter’s Lodge is looked after by a housekeeper who is quite capable
of doing all we need when we run down for an occasional week-end. Of
course, during the shooting season, we take down some of our own
servants from Newmarket.

“My uncle, Mr. Harrington Pace (as you may know, my mother was a Miss
Pace of New York), has for the last three years made his home with us.
He never got on well with my father, or my elder brother, and I
suspect that my being somewhat of a prodigal son myself rather
increased than diminished his affection toward me. Of course, I am a
poor man, and my uncle was a rich one—in other words, he paid the
piper! But though exacting in many ways, he was not really hard to get
on with, and we all three lived very harmoniously together.

“Two days ago my uncle, rather wearied with some recent gayeties of
ours in town, suggested that we should run down to Derbyshire for a
day or two. My wife telegraphed to Mrs. Middleton, the housekeeper,
and we went down that same afternoon. Yesterday evening I was forced
to return to town, but my wife and my uncle remained on. This morning
I received this telegram.”

He handed it over to me, and I read:

    Come at once. Uncle Harrington murdered last night. Bring good
    detective if you can, but do come.
                                                              Zoe.

“Then as yet you know no details?”

“No, I suppose it will be in the evening papers. Without doubt the
police are in charge.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

It was about three o’clock when we arrived at the little station of
Elmer’s Dale. From there a five-mile drive brought us to a small gray
stone building in the midst of the rugged moors.

“A lonely place,” I observed.

Havering nodded.

“I shall try and get rid of it. I could never live here again.”

We unlatched the gate and were walking up the narrow path to the oak
door when a familiar figure emerged and came to meet us.

“Japp!” I ejaculated.

The Scotland Yard Inspector grinned at me in a friendly fashion before
addressing my companion.

“Mr. Havering, I think? I’ve been sent down from London to take charge
of this case, and I’d like a word with you, if I may, sir.”

“My wife——”

“I’ve seen your good lady, sir—and the housekeeper. I wont keep you a
moment, but I’m anxious to get back to the village now that I’ve seen
all there is to see here.”

“I know nothing as yet as to what—”

“Ex-actly,” said Japp soothingly. “But there are just one or two
little points I’d like your opinion about all the same. Captain
Hastings, here, he knows me, and he’ll go on up to the house and tell
them you’re coming.”

I went on to the house. I rang the bell, as Japp had closed the door
behind him. After some moments it was opened to me by a middle-aged
woman in black.

“Mr. Havering will be here in a moment,” I explained. “He has been
detained by the Inspector. I have come down with him from London to
look into the case. Perhaps you can tell me briefly what occurred last
night?”

“Come inside, sir.” She closed the door behind me, and we stood in the
dimly lighted hall. “It was after dinner last night, sir, that the man
came. He asked to see Mr. Pace, sir, and seeing that he spoke the same
way, I thought it was an American gentleman friend of Mr. Pace’s, and
I showed him into the gun-room, and then went to tell Mr. Pace. He
wouldn’t give no name, which of course was a bit odd, now I come to
think of it.

“I told Mr. Pace, and he seemed puzzled, like, but he said to the
mistress: ‘Excuse me, Zoe, while I just see what this fellow wants.’
He went off to the gun-room, and I went back to the kitchen, but after
a while I heard loud voices, as if they were quarreling, and I came
out into the hall. At the same time, the mistress she comes out too,
and just then there was a shot and then a dreadful silence. We both
ran to the gun-room door, but it was locked, and we had to go round to
the window. It was open, and there inside was Mr. Pace, all shot and
bleeding.”

“What became of the man?”

“He must have got away through the window, sir, before we got to it.”

“And then?”

“Mrs. Havering sent me to fetch the police. Five miles to walk, it
was. They came back with me; and the constable, he stayed all night;
and this morning the police gentleman from London arrived.”

“What was this man like who called to see Mr. Pace?”

The housekeeper reflected.

“He had a black beard, sir, and was about middle-aged, and had on a
light overcoat. Beyond the fact that he spoke like an American, I
didn’t notice much about him.”

“I see. Now, I wonder if I can see Mrs. Havering?”

“She’s upstairs, sir. Shall I tell her?”

“If you please. Tell her that Mr. Havering is outside with Inspector
Japp, and that the gentleman he has brought back with him from London
is anxious to speak to her as soon as possible.”

“Very good, sir.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

I was in a fever of impatience to get at all the facts. Japp had two
or three hours start of me, and his anxiety to be gone made me keen to
be close at his heels.

Mrs. Havering did not keep me waiting long. In a few minutes I heard a
light step descending the stairs, and looked up to see a very handsome
young woman coming toward me. She wore a flame-colored jumper, that
set off the slender boyishness of her figure. On her dark head was a
little hat of flame-colored leather. Even the present tragedy could
not dim the vitality of her personality.

I introduced myself, and she nodded in quick comprehension.

“Of course I have often heard of you and your colleague, M. Poirot.
You have done some wonderful things together, haven’t you? It was very
clever of my husband to get you so promptly. Now, will you ask me
questions? That is the easiest way, isn’t it, of getting to know all
you want to about this dreadful affair?”

“Thank you, Mrs. Havering. Now, what time was it that this man
arrived?”

“It must have been just before nine o’clock. We had finished dinner,
and were sitting over our coffee and cigarettes.”

“Your husband had already left for London?”

“Yes, he went up by the six-fifteen.”

“Did he go by car to the station, or did he walk?”

“Our own car isn’t down here. One came out from the garage in Elmer’s
Dale to fetch him in time for the train.”

“Was Mr. Pace quite his usual self?”

“Absolutely—most normal in every way.”

“Now, can you describe this visitor at all?”

“I’m afraid not. I didn’t see him. Mrs. Middleton showed him straight
into the gun-room and then came to tell my uncle.”

“What did your uncle say?”

“He seemed rather annoyed, but went off at once. It was about five
minutes later that I heard the sound of raised voices. I ran out into
the hall, and almost collided with Mrs. Middleton. Then we heard the
shot. The gun-room door was locked on the inside, and we had to go
round the house to the window. Of course that took some time, and the
murderer had been able to get well away. My poor uncle”—her voice
faltered—“had been shot through the head. I saw at once that he was
dead, and I sent Mrs. Middleton for the police straight away. I was
careful to touch nothing in the room but to leave it exactly as I
found it.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

I nodded approval.

“Now, as to the weapon?”

“Well, I can make a guess at it, Captain Hastings. A pair of revolvers
of my husband’s were mounted upon the wall. One of them is missing. I
pointed this out to the police, and they took the other one away with
them. When they have extracted the bullet, I suppose they will know
for certain.”

“May I go to the gun-room?”

“Certainly. The police have finished with it. But the body has been
removed.”

She accompanied me to the scene of the crime. At that moment Havering
entered the hall, and with a quick apology, his wife ran to him. I was
left to undertake my investigations alone.

I may as well confess at once that they were rather disappointing. In
detective-novels, clues abound, but here I could find nothing that
struck me as out of the ordinary except a large bloodstain on the
carpet where I judged the dead man had fallen. I examined everything
with painstaking care and took a couple of pictures of the room with
my little camera, which I had brought with me. I also examined the
ground outside the window, but it appeared to have been so heavily
trampled that I judged it was useless to waste time over it. Now I had
seen all that Hunter’s Lodge had to show me. I must go back to Elmer’s
Dale and get into touch with Japp. Accordingly I took leave of the
Haverings, and was driven off in the car that had brought us up from
the station.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Japp I found at the Matlock Arms, and he took me forthwith to see the
body. Harrington Pace was a small, spare, cleanshaven man, typically
American in appearance. He had been shot through the back of the head,
and the revolver had been discharged at close quarters.

“Turned away for a moment,” remarked Japp, “and the other fellow
snatched up a revolver and shot him. The one Mrs. Havering handed over
to us was fully loaded, and I suppose the other one was also. Curious
what darn fool things people do. Fancy keeping two loaded revolvers
hanging up on your wall!”

“What do you think of the case?” I asked as we left the gruesome
chamber behind us.

“Well, I’d got my eye on Havering to begin with.... Oh, yes,”—noting
my exclamation of astonishment,—“Havering has one or two shady
incidents in his past. When he was a boy at Oxford, there was some
funny business about the signature on one of his father’s checks. All
hushed up, of course. Then he’s pretty heavily in debt now, and
they’re the kind of debts he wouldn’t like to go to his uncle about;
whereas you may be sure the uncle’s will would be in his favor. Yes,
I’d got my eye on him, and that’s why I wanted to speak to him before
he saw his wife; but their statements dovetail all right, and I’ve
been to the station, and there’s no doubt whatever that he left by the
six-fifteen. That gets up to London about ten-thirty. He went straight
to his club, he says, and if that’s confirmed all right—why, he
couldn’t have been shooting his uncle here at nine o’clock in a black
beard!”

“Ah, yes—I was going to ask you what you thought about that beard?”

Japp winked.

“I think it grew pretty fast—grew in the five miles from Elmer’s Dale
to Hunter’s Lodge. Americans that I’ve met are mostly clean shaven. I
questioned the housekeeper first, and then her mistress, and their
stories agree all right; but I’m sorry Mrs. Havering didn’t get a look
at the fellow. She’s a smart woman, and she might have noticed
something that would set us on the track.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

I sat down and wrote a minute and lengthy account to Poirot. I was
able to add various further items of information before I posted the
letter.

The bullet had been extracted and was proved to have been fired from a
revolver identical in size to the one held by the police. Furthermore,
Mr. Havering’s movements on the night in question had been checked and
verified, and it was proved beyond doubt that he had actually arrived
in London by the train in question. And thirdly, a sensational
development had occurred. A city gentleman, living at Ealing, on
crossing Haven Green to get to the District Railway station that
morning, had observed a brown paper parcel stuck between the railings.
Opening it, he found that it contained a revolver. He handed the
parcel over to the local police station, and before night it was
proved to be the one we were in search of, the fellow to that given us
by Mrs. Havering. One bullet had been fired from it.

All this I added to my report. A wire from Poirot arrived while I was
at breakfast the following morning:

    Of course black-bearded man was not Havering. Only you or
    Japp would have such an idea. Wire me description of
    housekeeper and what clothes she wore this morning. Same
    of Mrs. Havering. Do not waste time taking photographs of
    interiors. They are underexposed and not in the least
    artistic.

It seemed to me that Poirot’s style was unnecessarily facetious. I
also fancied he was a shade jealous of my position on the spot, with
full facilities for handling the case. His request for a description
of the clothes worn by the two women appeared to me to be simply
ridiculous, but I complied as well as I, a mere man, was able to. At
eleven a reply wire came from Poirot:

    Advise Japp arrest housekeeper before it is too late.

Dumfounded, I took the wire to Japp. He swore softly under his breath.

“He’s the goods, M. Poirot! If he says so, there’s something in it.
And I hardly noticed the woman! I don’t know that I can go so far as
arresting her, but I’ll have her watched. We’ll go up right away and
take another look at her.”

But it was too late. Mrs. Middleton, that quiet, middle-aged woman,
who had appeared so normal and respectable, had vanished into thin
air. Her box had been left behind. It contained only ordinary wearing
apparel. There was no clue in it to her identity, or as to her
whereabouts.

                  *       *       *       *       *

From Mrs. Havering we elicited all the facts we could.

“I engaged her about three weeks ago, when Mrs. Emery, our former
housekeeper, left. She came to me from Mrs. Selboume’s Agency in Mount
St.—a very well-known place. I get all my servants from there. They
sent several women to see me, but this Mrs. Middleton seemed much the
nicest, and had splendid references. I engaged her on the spot, and
notified the Agency of the fact. I can’t believe that there was
anything wrong with her. She was such a nice, quiet woman.”

The thing was certainly a mystery.

While it was clear that the woman herself could not have committed the
crime, since at the moment the shot was fired Mrs. Havering was with
her in the hall, nevertheless she must have some connection with the
murder, or why should she suddenly take to her heels and bolt?

I wired the latest development to Poirot, and suggested returning to
London and making inquiries at Selbourne’s Agency. Poirot’s reply was
prompt:

    Useless to inquire at Agency. They will never have heard
    of her. Find out what vehicle took her up to Hunter’s
    Lodge when she first arrived there.

Though mystified, I was obedient. The means of transport in Elmer’s
Dale were limited. The local garage had two cars, and there were two
station flies. None of these had been requisitioned on the date in
question. I may also mention that inquiries at the Agency in London
bore out Poirot’s prognostication. No such woman as “Mrs. Middleton”
had ever been on their books. They had received the Hon. Mrs.
Havering’s application for a housekeeper, and had sent her various
applicants for the post. When she sent them the engagement fee, she
omitted to mention which woman she had selected.

    [It is suggested that the reader pause in his perusal of the story
    at this point, make his own solution of the mystery—and then see
    how close he comes to that of the author—The Editors.]

Somewhat crestfallen, I returned to London. I found Poirot established
in an armchair by the fire. He greeted me with much affection.

“_Mon ami Hastings!_ But how glad I am to see you! Veritably I have
for you a great affection! And you have enjoyed yourself? You have run
to and fro with the good Japp? You have interrogated and investigated
to your heart’s content?”

“Poirot,” I cried, “the thing’s a dark mystery! It will never be
solved.”

“It is true that we are not likely to cover ourselves with glory over
it.”

“No, indeed. It’s a hard nut to crack.”

“Oh, as far as that goes, me, I am very good at cracking the nuts! A
veritable squirrel! It is not that which embarrasses me. I know well
enough who killed Mr. Harrington Pace.”

“You know? How did you find out?”

“Your illuminating answers to my wires supplied me with the truth.....
See here, Hastings, let us examine the facts methodically and in
order. Mr. Harrington Pace is a man with a considerable fortune which
at his death will doubtless pass to his nephew—point number one. His
nephew is known to be desperately hard up—point number two. His nephew
is also known to be—shall we say a man of loose moral fiber? Point
number three!”

“But  Roger Havering is proved to have journeyed straight up to
London.”

“_Précisément!_ And therefore, as Mr. Havering left Elmer’s Dale at
six-fifteen, and since Mr. Pace cannot have been killed before he left
(or the doctor would have spotted the time of the crime as being given
wrongly when he examined the body), we conclude, quite rightly, that
Mr. Havering did _not_ shoot his uncle. But there is a Mrs. Havering,
Hastings.”

“Impossible! The housekeeper was with her when the shot was fired.”

“Ah, yes, the housekeeper. But she has disappeared.”

“She will be found.”

“I think not. There is something peculiarly elusive about that
housekeeper—don’t you think so? It struck me at once.”

“She played her part, I suppose, and then got out in the nick of
time.”

“And what was her part?”

“Well—I presume to admit her confederate, the black-bearded man.”

“Oh, no, that was not her part. Her part was what you have just
mentioned, to provide an alibi for Mrs. Havering at the moment the
shot was fired. And no one will ever find her, _mon ami_, because she
does not exist! ‘There’s no sech person,’ as your so great Shakespeare
says.”

“It was Dickens,” I murmured, smiling. “But what do you mean, Poirot?”

“I mean that Zoe Havering was an actress before her marriage, that you
and Japp only saw the housekeeper in a dark hall, a dim, middle-aged
figure in black with a faint, subdued voice, and finally that neither
you, nor Japp, nor the local police whom the housekeeper fetched, ever
saw Mrs. Middleton and her mistress at one and the same time. It was a
child’s play for that clever and daring woman. On the pretext of
summoning her mistress, she runs upstairs, slips on a bright jumper
and a hat with black curls attached which she jams down over the gray
transformation. A few deft touches, and the make-up is removed; a
slight dusting of rouge, and the brilliant Zoe Havering comes down
with her clear ringing voice.”

“But the revolver that was found at Ealing? Mrs. Havering could not
have placed it there?”

“No, that was Roger Havering’s job—but it was a mistake on their part.
It put me on the right track. A man who has committed a murder with a
revolver which he found on the spot would fling it away at once; he
would not carry it up to London with him. No, the motive was clear;
the criminals wished to focus the interest of the police on a spot far
removed from Derbyshire; they were anxious to get the police away as
soon as possible from the vicinity of Hunter’s Lodge. Of course, the
revolver found at Ealing was not the one with which Mr. Pace was shot.
Roger Havering discharged one shot from it, brought it up to London,
went straight to his club to establish his alibi, then went quickly
out to Ealing by the District Railway, a matter of about twenty
minutes only, placed the parcel where it was found and so back to
town. That charming creature his wife, quietly shoots Mr. Pace after
dinner—you remember he was shot from behind? Another significant
point, that! She reloads the revolver and puts it back in its place,
and then starts off with her desperate little comedy.”

“It’s incredible,” I murmured, fascinated. “And yet—”

“And yet it is true. _Bien sûr_, my friend, it is true! But to bring
that precious pair to justice, that is another matter. Well, Japp must
do what he can—I have written him fully; but I very much fear,
Hastings, that we shall be obliged to leave them to Fate—or _le bon
Dieu_—whichever you prefer.”

“The wicked flourish like a green bay tree,” I reminded him.

“But at a price, Hastings, always at a price, _croyez moi_!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Poirot’s forebodings were confirmed. Japp, though convinced of the
truth of his theory, was unable to get together the necessary evidence
to insure a conviction. Mr. Pace’s huge fortune passed into the hands
of his murderers. Nevertheless, Nemesis did overtake them, and when I
read in the paper that the Hon. Roger and Mrs. Havering were among
those killed in the crashing of the Air Mail to Paris, I knew that
Justice was satisfied.


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the June, 1924 issue of
The Blue Book Magazine.]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNTER'S LODGE CASE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Man in the Brown Suit
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Man in the Brown Suit

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: January 14, 2020 [eBook #61168]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN IN THE BROWN SUIT ***

  THE MAN IN THE BROWN SUIT




  BY THE SAME AUTHOR

  THE MYSTERIOUS AFFAIR AT STYLES

  THE SECRET ADVERSARY

  THE MURDER ON THE LINKS




  THE MAN IN THE BROWN SUIT
  by
  AGATHA CHRISTIE

  NEW YORK

  DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY

  1924





  Copyright, 1924,
  By DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, Inc.

  PRINTED IN THE U. S. A. BY
  The Quinn & Boden Company
  BOOK MANUFACTURERS
  RAHWAY   NEW JERSEY




  To E. A. B.

  IN MEMORY OF A JOURNEY, SOME
  LION STORIES AND A REQUEST THAT
  I SHOULD SOME DAY WRITE THE
  “MYSTERY OF THE MILL HOUSE”



  THE MAN IN THE BROWN SUIT




  THE MAN IN THE BROWN SUIT


  PROLOGUE


Nadina, the Russian dancer who had taken Paris by storm, swayed to
the sound of the applause, bowed and bowed again. Her narrow black
eyes narrowed themselves still more, the long line of her scarlet
mouth curved faintly upwards. Enthusiastic Frenchmen continued to
beat the ground appreciatively as the curtain fell with a swish,
hiding the reds and blues and magentas of the bizarre _décors._ In
a swirl of blue and orange draperies the dancer left the stage. A
bearded gentleman received her enthusiastically in his arms. It
was the Manager.

“Magnificent, _petite,_ magnificent,” he cried. “To-night you have
surpassed yourself.” He kissed her gallantly on both cheeks in a
somewhat matter-of-fact manner.

Madame Nadina accepted the tribute with the ease of long habit and
passed on to her dressing-room, where bouquets were heaped
carelessly everywhere, marvellous garments of futuristic design
hung on pegs, and the air was hot and sweet with the scent of the
massed blossoms and with more sophisticated perfumes and essences.
Jeanne, the dresser, ministered to her mistress, talking incessantly
and pouring out a stream of fulsome compliment.

A knock at the door interrupted the flow. Jeanne went to answer
it, and returned with a card in her hand.

“Madame will receive?”

“Let me see.”

The dancer stretched out a languid hand, but at the sight of the
name on the card, “Count Sergius Paulovitch,” a sudden flicker of
interest came into her eyes.

“I will see him. The maize _peignoir,_ Jeanne, and quickly. And
when the Count comes you may go.”

_“Bien, Madame.”_

Jeanne brought the _peignoir,_ an exquisite wisp of corn-coloured
chiffon and ermine. Nadina slipped into it, and sat smiling to
herself, whilst one long white hand beat a slow tattoo on the glass
of the dressing-table.

The Count was prompt to avail himself of the privilege accorded to
him—a man of medium height, very slim, very elegant, very pale,
extraordinarily weary. In feature, little to take hold of, a man
difficult to recognize again if one left his mannerisms out of
account. He bowed over the dancer’s hand with exaggerated
courtliness.

“Madame, this is a pleasure indeed.”

So much Jeanne heard before she went out closing the door behind
her. Alone with her visitor, a subtle change came over Nadina’s
smile.

“Compatriots though we are, we will not speak Russian, I think,”
she observed.

“Since we neither of us know a word of the language, it might be
as well,” agreed her guest.

By common consent, they dropped into English, and nobody, now that
the Count’s mannerisms had dropped from him, could doubt that it
was his native language. He had, indeed, started life as a
quick-change music-hall artiste in London.

“You had a great success to-night,” he remarked. “I congratulate
you.”

“All the same,” said the woman, “I am disturbed. My position is
not what it was. The suspicions aroused during the War have never
died down. I am continually watched and spied upon.”

“But no charge of espionage was ever brought against you?”

“Our chief lays his plans too carefully for that.”

“Long life to the ‘Colonel,’” said the Count, smiling. “Amazing
news, is it not, that he means to retire? To retire! Just like a
doctor, or a butcher, or a plumber——”

“Or any other business man,” finished Nadina. “It should not
surprise us. That is what the ‘Colonel’ has always been—an excellent
man of business. He has organized crime as another man might
organize a boot factory. Without committing himself, he has planned
and directed a series of stupendous _coups,_ embracing every branch
of what we might call his ‘profession.’ Jewel robberies, forgery,
espionage (the latter very profitable in war-time), sabotage,
discreet assassination, there is hardly anything he has not touched.
Wisest of all, he knows when to stop. The game begins to be
dangerous?—he retires gracefully—with an enormous fortune!”

“H’m!” said the Count doubtfully. “It is rather—upsetting for all
of us. We are at a loose end, as it were.”

“But we are being paid off—on a most generous scale!” Something,
some undercurrent of mockery in her tone, made the man look at her
sharply. She was smiling to herself, and the quality of her smile
aroused his curiosity. But he proceeded diplomatically:

“Yes, the ‘Colonel’ has always been a generous paymaster. I
attribute much of his success to that—and to his invariable plan
of providing a suitable scapegoat. A great brain, undoubtedly a
great brain! And an apostle of the maxim, ‘If you want a thing done
safely, do not do it yourself!’ Here are we, every one of us
incriminated up to the hilt and absolutely in his power, and not
one of us has anything on him.”

He paused, almost as though he were expecting her to disagree with
him, but she remained silent, smiling to herself as before.

“Not one of us,” he mused. “Still, you know, he is superstitious,
the old man. Years ago, I believe, he went to one of these
fortune-telling people. She prophesied a lifetime of success, but
declared that his downfall would be brought about through a woman.”

He had interested her now. She looked up eagerly.

“That is strange, very strange! Through a woman, you say?”

He smiled and shrugged his shoulders.

“Doubtless, now that he has—retired, he will marry. Some young
society beauty, who will disperse his millions faster than he
acquired them.”

Nadina shook her head.

“No, no, that is not the way of it. Listen, my friend, to-morrow
I go to London.”

“But your contract here?”

“I shall be away only one night. And I go incognito, like Royalty.
No one will ever know that I have left France. And why do you think
that I go?”

“Hardly for pleasure at this time of year. January, a detestable
foggy month! It must be for profit, eh?”

“Exactly.” She rose and stood in front of him, every graceful line
of her arrogant with pride. “You said just now that none of us had
anything on the chief. You were wrong. I have. I, a woman, have
had the wit and, yes, the courage—for it needs courage—to
double-cross him. You remember the De Beer diamonds?”

“Yes, I remember. At Kimberley, just before the war broke out? I
had nothing to do with it, and I never heard the details, the case
was hushed up for some reason, was it not? A fine haul too.”

“A hundred thousand pounds worth of stones. Two of us worked
it—under the ‘Colonel’s’ orders, of course. And it was then that
I saw my chance. You see, the plan was to substitute some of the
De Beer diamonds for some sample diamonds brought from South
America by two young prospectors who happened to be in Kimberley
at the time. Suspicion was then bound to fall on them.”

“Very clever,” interpolated the Count approvingly.

“The ‘Colonel’ is always clever. Well, I did my part—but I also
did one thing which the ‘Colonel’ had not foreseen. I kept back
some of the South American stones—one or two are unique and could
easily be proved never to have passed through De Beer’s hands. With
these diamonds in my possession, I have the whip-hand of my esteemed
chief. Once the two young men are cleared, his part in the matter
is bound to be suspected. I have said nothing all these years, I
have been content to know that I had this weapon in reserve, but
now matters are different. I want my price—and it will be a big,
I might almost say a staggering price.”

“Extraordinary,” said the Count. “And doubtless you carry these
diamonds about with you everywhere?”

His eyes roamed gently round the disordered room.

Nadina laughed softly. “You need suppose nothing of the sort. I am
not a fool. The diamonds are in a safe place where no one will
dream of looking for them.”

“I never thought you a fool, my dear lady, but may I venture to
suggest that you are somewhat foolhardy? The ‘Colonel’ is not the
type of man to take kindly to being blackmailed, you know.”

“I am not afraid of him,” she laughed. “There is only one man I
have ever feared—and he is dead.”

The man looked at her curiously.

“Let us hope that he will not come to life again, then,” he remarked
lightly.

“What do you mean?” cried the dancer sharply.

The Count looked slightly surprised.

“I only meant that a resurrection would be awkward for you,” he
explained. “A foolish joke.”

She gave a sigh of relief.

“Oh, no, he is dead all right. Killed in the war. He was a man who
once—loved me.”

“In South Africa?” asked the Count negligently.

“Yes, since you ask it, in South Africa.”

“That is your native country, is it not?”

She nodded. Her visitor rose and reached for his hat.

“Well,” he remarked, “you know your own business best, but, if I
were you, I should fear the ‘Colonel’ far more than any disillusioned
lover. He is a man whom it is particularly easy to—underestimate.”

She laughed scornfully.

“As if I did not know him after all these years!”

“I wonder if you do?” he said softly. “I very much wonder if you
do.”

“Oh, I am not a fool! And I am not alone in this. The South African
mail-boat docks at Southampton to-morrow, and on board her is a
man who has come specially from Africa at my request and who has
carried out certain orders of mine. The ‘Colonel’ will have not
one of us to deal with, but two.”

“Is that wise?”

“It is necessary.”

“You are sure of this man?”

A rather peculiar smile played over the dancer’s face.

“I am quite sure of him. He is inefficient, but perfectly
trustworthy.” She paused, and then added in an indifferent tone of
voice: “As a matter of fact, he happens to be my husband.”




  CHAPTER I


Everybody has been at me, right and left, to write this story from
the great (represented by Lord Nasby) to the small (represented by
our late maid of all work, Emily, whom I saw when I was last in
England. “Lor’, miss, what a beyewtiful book you might make out of
it all—just like the pictures!”).

I’ll admit that I’ve certain qualifications for the task. I was
mixed up in the affair from the very beginning, I was in the thick
of it all through, and I was triumphantly “in at the death.” Very
fortunately, too, the gaps that I cannot supply from my own
knowledge are amply covered by Sir Eustace Pedler’s diary, of which
he has kindly begged me to make use.

So here goes. Anne Beddingfeld starts to narrate her adventures.

I’d always longed for adventures. You see, my life had such a
dreadful sameness. My father, Professor Beddingfeld, was one of
England’s greatest living authorities on Primitive Man. He really
was a genius—every one admits that. His mind dwelt in Palaeolithic
times, and the inconvenience of life for him was that his body
inhabited the modern world. Papa did not care for modern man—even
Neolithic Man he despised as a mere herder of cattle, and he did
not rise to enthusiasm until he reached the Mousterian period.

Unfortunately one cannot entirely dispense with modern men. One is
forced to have some kind of truck with butchers and bakers and
milkmen and greengrocers. Therefore, Papa being immersed in the
past, Mamma having died when I was a baby, it fell to me to
undertake the practical side of living. Frankly, I hate Palaeolithic
Man, be he Aurignacian, Mousterian, Chellian, or anything else,
and though I typed and revised most of Papa’s _Neanderthal Man and
his Ancestors,_ Neanderthal men themselves fill me with loathing,
and I always reflect what a fortunate circumstance it was that they
became extinct in remote ages.

I do not know whether Papa guessed my feelings on the subject,
probably not, and in any case he would not have been interested.
The opinion of other people never interested him in the slightest
degree. I think it was really a sign of his greatness. In the same
way, he lived quite detached from the necessities of daily life.
He ate what was put before him in an exemplary fashion, but seemed
mildly pained when the question of paying for it arose. We never
seemed to have any money. His celebrity was not of the kind that
brought in a cash return. Although he was a fellow of almost every
important society, and had rows of letters after his name, the
general public scarcely knew of his existence, and his long learned
books, though adding signally to the sum-total of human knowledge,
had no attraction for the masses. Only on one occasion did he leap
into the public gaze. He had read a paper before some society on
the subject of the young of the chimpanzee. The young of the human
race show some anthropoid features, whereas the young of the
chimpanzee approach more nearly to the human than the adult
chimpanzee does. That seems to show that whereas our ancestors were
more Simian than we are, the chimpanzee’s were of a higher type
than the present species—in other words, the chimpanzee is a
degenerate. That enterprising newspaper, the _Daily Budget,_ being
hard up for something spicy, immediately brought itself out with
large headlines. “We are not descended from monkeys, but are
monkeys descended from _us?_ Eminent Professor says chimpanzees
are decadent humans.” Shortly afterwards a reporter called to see
Papa, and endeavoured to induce him to write a series of popular
articles on the theory. I have seldom seen Papa so angry. He turned
the reporter out of the house with scant ceremony, much to my
secret sorrow, as we were particularly short of money at the
moment. In fact, for a moment I meditated running after the young
man and informing him that my father had changed his mind and would
send the articles in question. I could easily have written them
myself, and the probabilities were that Papa would never have
learnt of the transaction, not being a reader of the _Daily Budget._
However, I rejected this course as being too risky, so I merely
put on my best hat and went sadly down the village to interview
our justly irate grocer.

The reporter from the _Daily Budget_ was the only young man who
ever came to our house. There were times when I envied Emily, our
little servant, who “walked out” whenever occasion offered with a
large sailor to whom she was affianced. In between times, to “keep
her hand in” as she expressed it, she walked out with the
greengrocer’s young man, and the chemist’s assistant. I reflected
sadly that I had no one to “keep my hand in” with. All Papa’s
friends were aged Professors—usually with long beards. It is true
that Professor Peterson once clasped me affectionately and said I
had a “neat little waist” and then tried to kiss me. The phrase
alone dated him hopelessly. No self-respecting female has had a
“neat little waist” since I was in my cradle.

I yearned for adventure, for love, for romance, and I seemed
condemned to an existence of drab utility. The village possessed
a lending library, full of tattered works of fiction, and I enjoyed
perils and love-making at second hand, and went to sleep dreaming
of stern, silent Rhodesians, and of strong men who always “felled
their opponent with a single blow.” There was no one in the village
who even looked as though he could “fell” an opponent, with a
single blow or with several.

There was the Kinema too, with a weekly episode of “The Perils of
Pamela.” Pamela was a magnificent young woman. Nothing daunted her.
She fell out of aeroplanes, adventured in submarines, climbed
skyscrapers and crept about in the Underworld without turning a
hair. She was not really clever, the Master Criminal of the
Underworld caught her each time, but as he seemed loath to knock
her on the head in a simple way, and always doomed her to death in
a sewer-gas chamber or by some new and marvellous means, the hero
was always able to rescue her at the beginning of the following
week’s episode. I used to come out with my head in a delirious
whirl—and then I would get home and find a notice from the Gas
Company threatening to cut us off if the outstanding account was
not paid!

And yet, though I did not suspect it, every moment was bringing
adventure nearer to me.

It is possible that there are many people in the world who have
never heard of the finding of an antique skull at the Broken Hill
Mine in Northern Rhodesia. I came down one morning to find Papa
excited to the point of apoplexy. He poured out the whole story to
me.

“You understand, Anne? There are undoubtedly certain resemblances
to the Java skull, but superficial—superficial only. No, here we
have what I have always maintained—the ancestral form of the
Neanderthal race. You grant that the Gibraltar skull is the most
primitive of the Neanderthal skulls found? Why? The cradle of the
race was in Africa. They passed to Europe——”

“Not marmalade on kippers, papa,” I said hastily, arresting my
parent’s absent-minded hand. “Yes, you were saying?”

“They passed to Europe on——”

Here he broke down with a bad fit of choking, the result of an
immoderate mouthful of kipper-bones.

“But we must start at once,” he declared, as he rose to his feet
at the conclusion of the meal. “There is no time to be lost. We
must be on the spot—there are doubtless incalculable finds to be
found in the neighbourhood. I shall be interested to note whether
the implements are typical of the Mousterian period—there will be
the remains of the primitive ox, I should say, but not those of
the woolly rhinoceros. Yes, a little army will be starting soon.
We must get ahead of them. You will write to Cook’s to-day, Anne?”

“What about money, papa?” I hinted delicately.

He turned a reproachful eye upon me.

“Your point of view always depresses me, my child. We must not be
sordid. No, no, in the cause of science one must not be sordid.”

“I feel Cook’s might be sordid, papa.”

Papa looked pained.

“My dear Anne, you will pay them in ready money.”

“I haven’t got any ready money.”

Papa looked thoroughly exasperated.

“My child, I really cannot be bothered with these vulgar money
details. The bank—I had something from the Manager yesterday,
saying I had twenty-seven pounds.”

“That’s your overdraft, I fancy.”

“Ah, I have it! Write to my publishers.”

I acquiesced doubtfully, Papa’s books bringing in more glory than
money. I liked the idea of going to Rhodesia immensely. “Stern
silent men,” I murmured to myself in an ecstasy. Then something in
my parent’s appearance struck me as unusual.

“You have odd boots on, papa,” I said. “Take off the brown one and
put on the other black one. And don’t forget your muffler. It’s a
very cold day.”

In a few minutes Papa stalked off, correctly booted and well
mufflered.

He returned late that evening, and, to my dismay, I saw his muffler
and overcoat were missing.

“Dear me, Anne, you are quite right. I took them off to go into
the cavern. One gets so dirty there.”

I nodded feelingly, remembering an occasion when Papa had returned
literally plastered from head to foot with rich Pleiocene clay.

Our principal reason for settling in Little Hampsly had been the
neighbourhood of Hampsly Cavern, a buried cave rich in deposits of
the Aurignacian culture. We had a tiny Museum in the village, and
the curator and Papa spent most of their days messing about
underground and bringing to light portions of woolly rhinoceros
and cave bear.

Papa coughed badly all the evening, and the following morning I
saw he had a temperature and sent for the doctor.

Poor Papa, he never had a chance. It was double pneumonia. He died
four days later.




  CHAPTER II


Every one was very kind to me. Dazed as I was, I appreciated that.
I felt no overwhelming grief. Papa had never loved me, I knew that
well enough. If he had, I might have loved him in return. No, there
had not been love between us, but we had belonged together, and I
had looked after him, and had secretly admired his learning and
his uncompromising devotion to science. And it hurt me that Papa
should have died just when the interest of life was at its height
for him. I should have felt happier if I could have buried him in
a cave, with paintings of reindeer and flint implements, but the
force of public opinion constrained a neat tomb (with marble slab)
in our hideous local churchyard. The vicar’s consolations, though
well meant, did not console me in the least.

It took some time to dawn upon me that the thing I had always
longed for—freedom—was at last mine. I was an orphan, and
practically penniless, but free. At the same time I realized the
extraordinary kindness of all these good people. The vicar did his
best to persuade me that his wife was in urgent need of a companion
help. Our tiny local library suddenly made up its mind to have an
assistant librarian. Finally, the doctor called upon me, and after
making various ridiculous excuses for failing to send in a proper
bill, he hummed and hawed a good deal and suddenly suggested that
I should marry him.

I was very much astonished. The doctor was nearer forty than
thirty, and a round, tubby little man. He was not at all like the
hero of “The Perils of Pamela,” and even less like a stern and
silent Rhodesian. I reflected a minute and then asked him why he
wanted to marry me. That seemed to fluster him a good deal, and he
murmured that a wife was a great help to a General Practitioner.
The position seemed even more unromantic than before, and yet
something in me urged towards its acceptance. Safety, that was what
I was being offered. Safety—and a Comfortable Home. Thinking it
over now, I believe I did the little man an injustice. He was
honestly in love with me, but a mistaken delicacy prevented him
from pressing his suit on those lines. Anyway, my love of romance
rebelled.

“It’s extremely kind of you,” I said. “But it’s impossible. I could
never marry a man unless I loved him madly.”

“You don’t think——?”

“No, I don’t,” I said firmly.

He sighed.

“But, my dear child, what do you propose to do?”

“Have adventures and see the world,” I replied, without the least
hesitation.

“Miss Anne, you are very much of a child still. You don’t
understand——”

“The practical difficulties? Yes, I do, doctor. I’m not a
sentimental schoolgirl—I’m a hard-headed mercenary shrew! You’d
know it if you married me!”

“I wish you would reconsider——”

“I can’t.”

He sighed again.

“I have another proposal to make. An aunt of mine who lives in
Wales is in want of a young lady to help her. How would that suit
you?”

“No, doctor, I’m going to London. If things happen anywhere, they
happen in London. I shall keep my eyes open and you’ll see,
something will turn up! You’ll hear of me next in China or
Timbuctoo.”

My next visitor was Mr. Flemming, Papa’s London solicitor. He came
down specially from town to see me. An ardent anthropologist
himself, he was a great admirer of Papa’s works. He was a tall,
spare man with a thin face and grey hair. He rose to meet me as I
entered the room and, taking both my hands in his, patted them
affectionately.

“My poor child,” he said. “My poor, poor child.”

Without conscious hypocrisy, I found myself assuming the demeanour
of a bereaved orphan. He hypnotized me into it. He was benignant,
kind and fatherly—and without the least doubt he regarded me as a
perfect fool of a girl left adrift to face an unkind world. From
the first I felt that it was quite useless to try to convince him
of the contrary. As things turned out, perhaps it was just as well
I didn’t.

“My dear child, do you think you can listen to me whilst I try to
make a few things clear to you?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Your father, as you know, was a very great man. Posterity will
appreciate him. But he was not a good man of business.”

I knew that quite as well, if not better than Mr. Flemming, but I
restrained myself from saying so. He continued:

“I do not suppose you understand much of these matters. I will try
to explain as clearly as I can.”

He explained at unnecessary length. The upshot seemed to be that
I was left to face life with the sum of £87, 17s. 4d. It seemed a
strangely unsatisfying amount. I waited in some trepidation for
what was coming next. I feared that Mr. Flemming would be sure to
have an aunt in Scotland who was in want of a bright young
companion. Apparently, however, he hadn’t.

“The question is,” he went on, “the future. I understand you have
no living relatives?”

“I’m alone in the world,” I said, and was struck anew by my likeness
to a film heroine.

“You have friends?”

“Every one has been very kind to me,” I said gratefully.

“Who would not be kind to one so young and charming?” said Mr.
Flemming gallantly. “Well, well, my dear, we must see what can be
done.” He hesitated a minute, and then said: “Supposing—how would
it be if you came to us for a time?”

I jumped at the chance. London! The place for things to happen.

“It’s awfully kind of you,” I said. “Might I really? Just while
I’m looking round. I must start out to earn my living, you know?”

“Yes, yes, my dear child. I quite understand. We will look round
for something—suitable.”

I felt instinctively that Mr. Flemming’s ideas of “something
suitable” and mine were likely to be widely divergent, but it was
certainly not the moment to air my views.

“That is settled then. Why not return with me to-day?”

“Oh, thank you, but will Mrs. Flemming——”

“My wife will be delighted to welcome you.”

I wonder if husbands know as much about their wives as they think
they do. If I had a husband, I should hate him to bring home
orphans without consulting me first.

“We will send her a wire from the station,” continued the lawyer.

My few personal belongings were soon packed. I contemplated my hat
sadly before putting it on. It had originally been what I call a
“Mary” hat, meaning by that the kind of hat a housemaid ought to
wear on her day out—but doesn’t! A limp thing of black straw with
a suitably depressed brim. With the inspiration of genius, I had
kicked it once, punched it twice, dented in the crown and affixed
to it a thing like a cubist’s dream of a jazz carrot. The result
had been distinctly chic. The carrot I had already removed, of
course, and now I proceeded to undo the rest of my handiwork. The
“Mary” hat resumed its former status with an additional battered
appearance which made it even more depressing than formerly. I
might as well look as much like the popular conception of an orphan
as possible. I was just a shade nervous of Mrs. Flemming’s
reception, but hoped my appearance might have a sufficiently
disarming effect.

Mr. Flemming was nervous too. I realized that as we went up the
stairs of the tall house in a quiet Kensington Square. Mrs. Flemming
greeted me pleasantly enough. She was a stout, placid woman of the
“good wife and mother” type. She took me up to a spotless
chintz-hung bedroom, hoped I had everything I wanted, informed me
that tea would be ready in about a quarter of an hour, and left me
to my own devices.

I heard her voice, slightly raised, as she entered the drawing-room
below on the first floor.

“Well, Henry, why on earth——” I lost the rest, but the acerbity of
the tone was evident. And a few minutes later another phrase
floated up to me, in an even more acid voice:

“I agree with you! She is certainly _very_ good-looking.”

It is really a very hard life. Men will not be nice to you if you
are not good-looking, and women will not be nice to you if you are.

With a deep sigh I proceeded to do things to my hair. I have nice
hair. It is black—a real black, not dark brown, and it grows well
back from my forehead and down over the ears. With a ruthless hand
I dragged it upwards. As ears, my ears are quite all right, but
there is no doubt about it, ears are _démodé_ nowadays. They are
like the “Queen of Spain’s legs” in Professor Peterson’s young day.
When I had finished I looked almost unbelievably like the kind of
orphan that walks out in a queue with a little bonnet and a red
cloak.

I noticed when I went down that Mrs. Flemming’s eyes rested on my
exposed ears with quite a kindly glance. Mr. Flemming seemed
puzzled. I had no doubt that he was saying to himself, “What _has_
the child done to herself?”

On the whole the rest of the day passed off well. It was settled
that I was to start at once to look for something to do.

When I went to bed, I stared earnestly at my face in the glass.
Was I really good-looking? Honestly, I couldn’t say I thought so!
I hadn’t got a straight Grecian nose, or a rosebud mouth, or any
of the things you ought to have. It is true that a curate once told
me that my eyes were like “imprisoned sunshine in a dark, dark
wood”—but curates always know so many quotations, and fire them
off at random. I’d much prefer to have Irish blue eyes than dark
green ones with yellow flecks! Still, green is a good colour for
adventuresses.

I wound a black garment tightly round me, leaving my arms and
shoulders bare. Then I brushed back my hair and pulled it well down
over my ears again. I put a lot of powder on my face, so that the
skin seemed even whiter than usual. I fished about until I found
some old lip-salve, and I put oceans of it on my lips. Then I did
under my eyes with burnt cork. Finally, I draped a red ribbon over
my bare shoulder, stuck a scarlet feather in my hair, and placed
a cigarette in one corner of my mouth. The whole effect pleased me
very much.

“Anna the Adventuress,” I said aloud, nodding at my reflection.
“Anna the Adventuress. Episode I, ‘The House in Kensington’!”

Girls are foolish things.




  CHAPTER III


In the succeeding weeks I was a good deal bored.

Mrs. Flemming and her friends seemed to me to be supremely
uninteresting. They talked for hours of themselves and their
children and of the difficulties of getting good milk for the
children and of what they said to the Dairy when the milk wasn’t
good. Then they would go on to servants, and the difficulties of
getting good servants and of what they had said to the woman at
the Registry Office and of what the woman at the Registry Office
had said to them. They never seemed to read the papers or to care
about what went on in the world. They disliked travelling—everything
was so different to England. The Riviera was all right, of course,
because one met all one’s friends there.

I listened and contained myself with difficulty. Most of these
women were rich. The whole wide beautiful world was theirs to
wander in and they deliberately stayed in dirty dull London and
talked about milkmen and servants! I think now, looking back, that
I was perhaps a shade intolerant. But they _were_ stupid—stupid
even at their chosen job: most of them kept the most extraordinarily
inadequate and muddled housekeeping accounts.

My affairs did not progress very fast. The house and furniture had
been sold, and the amount realized had just covered our debts. As
yet, I had not been successful in finding a post. Not that I really
wanted one! I had the firm conviction that, if I went about looking
for adventure, adventure would meet me halfway. It is a theory of
mine that one always gets what one wants. My theory was about to
be proved in practice.

It was early in January—the 8th, to be exact. I was returning from
an unsuccessful interview with a lady who said she wanted a
secretary-companion, but really seemed to require a strong charwoman
who would work twelve hours a day for £25 a year. Having parted
with mutual veiled impolitenesses, I walked down Edgware Road (the
interview had taken place in a house in St. John’s Wood) and across
Hyde Park to St. George’s Hospital. There I entered Hyde Park
Corner Tube Station and took a ticket to Gloucester Road.

Once on the platform I walked to the extreme end of it. My inquiring
mind wished to satisfy itself as to whether there really _were_
points and an opening between the two tunnels just beyond the
station in the direction of Down Street. I was foolishly pleased
to find I was right. There were not many people on the platform,
and at the extreme end there was only myself and one man. As I
passed him, I sniffed dubiously. If there is one smell I cannot
bear it is that of moth balls! This man’s heavy overcoat simply
reeked of them. And yet most men begin to wear their winter
overcoats before January, and consequently by this time the smell
ought to have worn off. The man was beyond me, standing close to
the edge of the tunnel. He seemed lost in thought, and I was able
to stare at him without rudeness. He was a small thin man, very
brown of face, with light blue eyes and a small dark beard.

“Just come from abroad,” I deduced. “That’s why his overcoat smells
so. He’s come from India. Not an officer, or he wouldn’t have a
beard. Perhaps a tea-planter.”

At this moment the man turned as though to retrace his steps along
the platform. He glanced at me and then his eyes went on to
something behind me, and his face changed. It was distorted by
fear—almost panic. He stood a step backwards as though involuntarily
recoiling from some danger, forgetting that he was standing on the
extreme edge of the platform, and went down and over.

There was a vivid flash from the rails and a crackling sound. I
shrieked. People came running up. Two station officials seemed to
materialize from nowhere and took command.

I remained where I was, rooted to the spot by a sort of horrible
fascination. Part of me was appalled at the sudden disaster, and
another part of me was coolly and dispassionately interested in
the methods employed for lifting the man off the live rail and back
onto the platform.

“Let me pass, please. I am a medical man.”

A tall man with a brown beard pressed past me and bent over the
motionless body.

As he examined it, a curious sense of unreality seemed to possess
me. The thing wasn’t real—couldn’t be. Finally, the doctor stood
upright and shook his head.

“Dead as a door-nail. Nothing to be done.”

We had all crowded nearer, and an aggrieved porter raised his
voice.

“Now then, stand back there, will you? What’s the sense in crowding
round.”

A sudden nausea seized me, and I turned blindly and ran up the
stairs again towards the lift. I felt that it was too horrible. I
must get out into the open air. The doctor who had examined the
body was just ahead of me. The lift was just about to go up,
another having descended, and he broke into a run. As he did so,
he dropped a piece of paper.

I stopped, picked it up, and ran after him. But the lift gates
clanged in my face, and I was left holding the paper in my hand.
By the time the second lift reached the street level, there was no
sign of my quarry. I hoped it was nothing important that he had
lost, and for the first time I examined it.

It was a plain half-sheet of notepaper with some figures and words
scrawled upon it in pencil. This is a facsimile of it:

[Indistinct cursive script which appears to say something like:
 "1 7 . 1 2 2 Kilmorden Castle"]

On the face of it, it certainly did not appear to be of any
importance. Still, I hesitated to throw it away. As I stood there
holding it, I involuntarily wrinkled my nose in displeasure. Moth
balls again! I held the paper gingerly to my nose. Yes, it smelt
strongly of them. But, then——

I folded up the paper carefully and put it in my bag. I walked home
slowly and did a good deal of thinking.

I explained to Mrs. Flemming that I had witnessed a nasty accident
in the Tube and that I was rather upset and would go to my room
and lie down. The kind woman insisted on my having a cup of tea.
After that I was left to my own devices, and I proceeded to carry
out a plan I had formed coming home. I wanted to know what it was
that had produced that curious feeling of unreality whilst I was
watching the doctor examine the body. First I lay down on the floor
in the attitude of the corpse, then I laid a bolster down in my
stead, and proceeded to duplicate, so far as I could remember,
every motion and gesture of the doctor. When I had finished I had
got what I wanted. I sat back on my heels and frowned at the
opposite walls.

There was a brief notice in the evening papers that a man had been
killed in the Tube, and a doubt was expressed whether it was
suicide or accident. That seemed to me to make my duty clear, and
when Mr. Flemming heard my story he quite agreed with me.

“Undoubtedly you will be wanted at the inquest. You say no one else
was near enough to see what happened?”

“I had the feeling some one was coming up behind me, but I can’t
be sure—and, anyway, they wouldn’t be as near as I was.”

The inquest was held. Mr. Flemming made all the arrangements and
took me there with him. He seemed to fear that it would be a great
ordeal to me, and I had to conceal from him my complete composure.

The deceased had been identified as L. B. Carton. Nothing had been
found in his pockets except a house-agent’s order to view a house
on the river near Marlow. It was in the name of L. B. Carton,
Russell Hotel. The bureau clerk from the hotel identified the man
as having arrived the day before and booked a room under that name.
He had registered as L. B. Carton, Kimberley, S. Africa. He had
evidently come straight off the steamer.

I was the only person who had seen anything of the affair.

“You think it was an accident?” the coroner asked me.

“I am positive of it. Something alarmed him, and he stepped
backwards blindly without thinking what he was doing.”

“But what could have alarmed him?”

“That I don’t know. But there was something. He looked
panic-stricken.”

A stolid juryman suggested that some men were terrified of cats.
The man might have seen a cat. I didn’t think his suggestion a very
brilliant one, but it seemed to pass muster with the jury, who were
obviously impatient to get home and only too pleased at being able
to give a verdict of accident as opposed to suicide.

“It is extraordinary to me,” said the coroner, “that the doctor
who first examined the body has not come forward. His name and
address should have been taken at the time. It was most irregular
not to do so.”

I smiled to myself. I had my own theory in regard to the doctor.
In pursuance of it, I determined to make a call upon Scotland Yard
at an early date.

But the next morning brought a surprise. The Flemmings took in the
_Daily Budget,_ and the _Daily Budget_ was having a day after its
own heart.

EXTRAORDINARY SEQUEL TO TUBE ACCIDENT.

WOMAN FOUND STABBED IN LONELY HOUSE.

I read eagerly.

“A sensational discovery was made yesterday at the Mill House,
Marlow. The Mill House, which is the property of Sir Eustace
Pedler, M.P., is to be let unfurnished, and an order to view this
property was found in the pocket of the man who was at first
thought to have committed suicide by throwing himself on the live
rail at Hyde Park Corner Tube Station. In an upper room of the Mill
House the body of a beautiful young woman was discovered yesterday,
strangled. She is thought to be a foreigner, but so far has not
been identified. The police are reported to have a clue. Sir
Eustace Pedler, the owner of the Mill House, is wintering on the
Riviera.”




  CHAPTER IV


Nobody came forward to identify the dead woman. The inquest elicited
the following facts.

Shortly after one o’clock on January 8th, a well-dressed woman with
a slight foreign accent had entered the offices of Messrs. Butler
and Park, house-agents, in Knightsbridge. She explained that she
wanted to rent or purchase a house on the Thames within easy reach
of London. The particulars of several were given to her, including
those of the Mill House. She gave the name of Mrs. de Castina and
her address as the Ritz, but there proved to be no one of that name
staying there, and the hotel people failed to identify the body.

Mrs. James, the wife of Sir Eustace Pedler’s gardener, who acted
as caretaker to the Mill House and inhabited the small lodge
opening on the main road, gave evidence. About three o’clock that
afternoon, a lady came to see over the house. She produced an order
from the house-agents, and, as was the usual custom, Mrs. James
gave her the keys of the house. It was situated at some distance
from the lodge, and she was not in the habit of accompanying
prospective tenants. A few minutes later a young man arrived. Mrs.
James described him as tall and broad-shouldered, with a bronzed
face and light grey eyes. He was clean-shaven and was wearing a
brown suit. He explained to Mrs. James that he was a friend of the
lady who had come to look over the house, but had stopped at the
post office to send a telegram. She directed him to the house, and
thought no more about the matter.

Five minutes later he reappeared, handed her back the keys and
explained that he feared the house would not suit them. Mrs. James
did not see the lady, but thought that she had gone on ahead. What
she did notice was that the young man seemed very much upset about
something. “He looked like a man who’d seen a ghost. I thought he
was taken ill.”

On the following day another lady and gentleman came to see the
property and discovered the body lying on the floor in one of the
upstairs rooms. Mrs. James identified it as that of the lady who
had come the day before. The house-agents also recognized it as
that of “Mrs. de Castina.” The police surgeon gave it as his
opinion that the woman had been dead about twenty-four hours. The
_Daily Budget_ had jumped to the conclusion that the man in the
Tube had murdered the woman and afterwards committed suicide.
However, as the Tube victim was dead at two o’clock, and the woman
was alive and well at three o’clock, the only logical conclusion
to come to was that the two occurrences had nothing to do with each
other, and that the order to view the house at Marlow found in the
dead man’s pocket was merely one of those coincidences which so
often occur in this life.

A verdict of “Wilful Murder against some person or persons unknown”
was returned, and the police (and the _Daily Budget_) were left to
look for “the man in the brown suit.” Since Mrs. James was positive
that there was no one in the house when the lady entered it, and
that nobody except the young man in question entered it until the
following afternoon, it seemed only logical to conclude that he
was the murderer of the unfortunate Mrs. de Castina. She had been
strangled with a piece of stout black cord, and had evidently been
caught unawares with no time to cry out. The black silk handbag
which she carried contained a well-filled notecase and some loose
change, a fine lace handkerchief, unmarked, and the return half of
a first-class ticket to London. Nothing much there to go upon.

Such were the details published broadcast by the _Daily Budget,_
and “Find the Man in the Brown Suit” was their daily war-cry. On
an average about five hundred people wrote daily to announce their
success in the quest, and tall young men with well-tanned faces
cursed the day when their tailors had persuaded them to a brown
suit. The accident in the Tube, dismissed as a coincidence, faded
out of the public mind.

Was it a coincidence? I was not so sure. No doubt I was
prejudiced—the Tube incident was my own pet mystery—but there
certainly seemed to me to be a connection of some kind between the
two fatalities. In each there was a man with a tanned face—evidently
an Englishman living abroad, and there were other things. It was
the consideration of these other things that finally impelled me
to what I considered a dashing step. I presented myself at Scotland
Yard and demanded to see whoever was in charge of the Mill House
case.

My request took some time to understand, as I had inadvertently
selected the department for lost umbrellas, but eventually I was
ushered into a small room and presented to Detective Inspector
Meadows.

Inspector Meadows was a small man with a ginger head and what I
considered a peculiarly irritating manner. A satellite, also in
plain clothes, sat unobtrusively in a corner.

“Good morning,” I said nervously.

“Good morning. Will you take a seat? I understand you’ve something
to tell me that you think may be of use to us.”

His tone seemed to indicate that such a thing was unlikely in the
extreme. I felt my temper stirred.

“Of course you know about the man who was killed in the Tube? The
man who had an order to view this same house at Marlow in his
pocket.”

“Ah!” said the inspector. “You are the Miss Beddingfeld who gave
evidence at the inquest. Certainly the man had an order in his
pocket. A lot of other people may have had too—only they didn’t
happen to be killed.”

I rallied my forces.

“You don’t think it odd that this man had no ticket in his pocket?”

“Easiest thing in the world to drop your ticket. Done it myself.”

“And no money.”

“He had some loose change in his trousers pocket.”

“But no notecase.”

“Some men don’t carry a pocket-book or notecase of any kind.”

I tried another tack.

“You don’t think it’s odd that the doctor never came forward
afterwards?”

“A busy medical man very often doesn’t read the papers. He probably
forgot all about the accident.”

“In fact, inspector, you are determined to find nothing odd,” I
said sweetly.

“Well, I’m inclined to think you’re a little too fond of the word,
Miss Beddingfeld. Young ladies are romantic, I know—fond of
mysteries and such-like. But as I’m a busy man——”

I took the hint and rose.

The man in the corner raised a meek voice.

“Perhaps the young lady would tell us briefly what her ideas really
are on the subject, inspector?”

The inspector fell in with the suggestion readily enough.

“Yes, come now, Miss Beddingfeld, don’t be offended. You’ve asked
questions and hinted things. Just say straight out what it is
you’ve got in your head.”

I wavered between injured dignity and the overwhelming desire to
express my theories. Injured dignity went to the wall.

“You said at the inquest you were positive it wasn’t suicide?”

“Yes, I’m quite certain of that. The man was frightened. What
frightened him? It wasn’t me. But some one might have been walking
up the platform towards us—some one he recognized.”

“You didn’t see any one?”

“No,” I admitted. “I didn’t turn my head. Then, as soon as the body
was recovered from the line, a man pushed forward to examine it,
saying he was a doctor.”

“Nothing unusual in that,” said the inspector dryly.

“But he wasn’t a doctor.”

“What?”

“He wasn’t a doctor,” I repeated.

“How do you know that, Miss Beddingfeld?”

“It’s difficult to say, exactly. I’ve worked in Hospital during
the war, and I’ve seen doctors handle bodies. There’s a sort of
deft professional callousness that this man hadn’t got. Besides,
a doctor doesn’t usually feel for the heart on the right side of
the body.”

“He did that?”

“Yes, I didn’t notice it specially at the time—except that I felt
there was something wrong. But I worked it out when I got home,
and then I saw why the whole thing had looked so unhandy to me at
the time.”

“H’m,” said the inspector. He was reaching slowly for pen and
paper.

“In running his hands over the upper part of the man’s body he
would have ample opportunity to take anything he wanted from the
pockets.”

“Doesn’t sound likely to me,” said the inspector. “But—well, can
you describe him at all?”

“He was tall and broad-shouldered, wore a dark overcoat and black
boots, a bowler hat. He had a dark pointed beard and gold-rimmed
eyeglasses.”

“Take away the overcoat, the beard and the eyeglasses, and there
wouldn’t be much to know him by,” grumbled the inspector. “He could
alter his appearance easy enough in five minutes if he wanted
to—which he would do if he’s the swell pickpocket you suggest.”

I had not intended to suggest anything of the kind. But from this
moment I gave the inspector up as hopeless.

“Nothing more you can tell us about him?” he demanded, as I rose
to depart.

“Yes,” I said. I seized my opportunity to fire a parting shot. “His
head was markedly brachycephalic. He will not find it so easy to
alter that.”

I observed with pleasure that Inspector Meadow’s pen wavered. It
was clear that he did not know how to spell brachycephalic.




  CHAPTER V


In the first heat of indignation I found my next step unexpectedly
easy to tackle. I had had a half-formed plan in my head when I went
into Scotland Yard. One to be carried out if my interview there
was unsatisfactory (it had been profoundly unsatisfactory). That
is, if I had the nerve to go through with it.

Things that one would shrink from attempting normally are easily
tackled in a flush of anger. Without giving myself time to reflect,
I walked straight to the house of Lord Nasby.

Lord Nasby was the millionaire owner of the _Daily Budget._ He
owned other papers—several of them, but the _Daily Budget_ was his
special child. It was as the owner of the _Daily Budget_ that he
was known to every householder in the United Kingdom. Owing to the
fact that an itinerary of the great man’s daily proceedings had
just been published, I knew exactly where to find him at this
moment. It was his hour for dictating to his secretary in his own
house.

I did not, of course, suppose that any young woman who chose to
come and ask for him would be at once admitted to the august
presence. But I had attended to that side of the matter. In the
card-tray in the hall of the Flemmings’ house I had observed the
card of the Marquis of Loamsley, England’s most famous sporting
peer. I had removed the card, cleaned it carefully with bread-crumbs,
and pencilled upon it the words: “Please give Miss Beddingfeld a
few moments of your time.” Adventuresses must not be too scrupulous
in their methods.

The thing worked. A powdered footman received the card and bore it
away. Presently a pale secretary appeared. I fenced with him
successfully. He retired defeated. He again reappeared and begged
me to follow him. I did so. I entered a large room, a
frightened-looking shorthand-typist fled past me like a visitant
from the spirit-world. Then the door shut and I was face to face
with Lord Nasby.

A big man. Big head. Big face. Big moustache. Big stomach. I pulled
myself together. I had not come here to comment on Lord Nasby’s
stomach. He was already roaring at me.

“Well, what is it? What does Loamsley want? You his secretary?
What’s it all about?”

“To begin with,” I said with as great an appearance of coolness as
I could manage, “I don’t know Lord Loamsley, and he certainly knows
nothing about me. I took his card from the tray in the house of
the people I’m staying with, and I wrote those words on it myself.
It was important that I should see you.”

For a moment it appeared to be a toss up as to whether Lord Nasby
had apoplexy or not. In the end, he swallowed twice and got over
it.

“I admire your coolness, young woman. Well, you see me! If you
interest me, you will continue to see me for exactly two minutes
longer.”

“That will be ample,” I replied. “And I shall interest you. It’s
the Mill House Mystery.”

“If you’ve found ‘The Man in the Brown Suit,’ write to the Editor,”
he interrupted hastily.

“If you will interrupt, I shall be more than two minutes,” I said
sternly. “I haven’t found ‘The Man in the Brown Suit,’ but I’m
quite likely to do so.”

In as few words as possible I put the facts of the Tube accident
and the conclusions I had drawn from them before him. When I had
finished he said unexpectedly:

“What do you know of brachycephalic heads?”

I mentioned Papa.

“The Monkey man? Eh? Well, you seem to have a head of some kind
upon your own shoulders, young woman. But it’s all pretty thin,
you know. Not much to go upon. And no use to us—as it stands.”

“I’m perfectly aware of that.”

“What d’you want, then?”

“I want a job on your paper to investigate this matter.”

“Can’t do that. We’ve got our own special man on it.”

“And I’ve got my own special knowledge.”

“What you’ve just told me, eh?”

“Oh, no, Lord Nasby. I’ve still got something up my sleeve.”

“Oh, you have, have you? You seem a bright sort of girl. Well, what
is it?”

“When this so-called doctor got into the lift, he dropped a piece
of paper. I picked it up. It smelt of moth balls. So did the dead
man. The doctor didn’t. So I saw at once that the doctor must have
taken it off the body. It had two words written on it and some
figures.”

“Let’s see it.”

Lord Nasby stretched out a careless hand.

“I think not,” I said, smiling. “It’s my find, you see.”

“I’m right. You _are_ a bright girl. Quite right to hang on to it.
No scruples about not handing it over to the police?”

“I went there to do so this morning. They persisted in regarding
the whole thing as having nothing to do with the Marlow affair, so
I thought that in the circumstances I was justified in retaining
the paper. Besides, the inspector put my back up.”

“Short-sighted man. Well, my dear girl, here’s all I can do for
you. Go on working on this line of yours. If you get
anything—anything that’s publishable—send it along and you shall
have your chance. There’s always room for real talent on the
_Daily Budget._ But you’ve got to make good first. See?”

I thanked him, and apologized for my methods.

“Don’t mention it. I rather like cheek—from a pretty girl. By the
way, you said two minutes and you’ve been three, allowing for
interruptions. For a woman, that’s quite remarkable! Must be your
scientific training.”

I was in the street again, breathing hard as though I had been
running. I found Lord Nasby rather wearing as a new acquaintance.




  CHAPTER VI


I went home with a feeling of exultation. My scheme had succeeded
far better than I could possibly have hoped. Lord Nasby had been
positively genial. It only now remained for me to “Make good,” as
he expressed it. Once locked in my own room, I took out my precious
piece of paper and studied it attentively. Here was the clue to
the mystery.

To begin with, what did the figures represent? There were five of
them, and a dot after the first two. “Seventeen—one hundred and
twenty-two,” I murmured.

That did not seem to lead to anything.

Next I added them up. That is often done in works of fiction and
leads to surprising deductions.

“One and seven make eight and one is nine and two are eleven and
two are thirteen.”

Thirteen! Fateful number! Was this a warning to me to leave the
whole thing alone? Very possibly. Anyway, except as a warning, it
seemed to be singularly useless. I declined to believe that any
conspirator would take that way of writing thirteen in real life.
If he meant thirteen, he would write thirteen. “13”—like that.

There was a space between the one and the two. I accordingly
subtracted twenty-two from a hundred and seventy-one. The result
was a hundred and fifty-nine. I did it again and made it a hundred
and forty-nine. These arithmetical exercises were doubtless
excellent practice, but as regarded the solution of the mystery,
they seemed totally ineffectual. I left arithmetic alone, not
attempting fancy division or multiplication, and went on to the
words.

Kilmorden Castle. That was something definite. A place. Probably
the cradle of an aristocratic family. (Missing heir? Claimant to
title?) Or possibly a picturesque ruin. (Buried treasure?)

Yes, on the whole I inclined to the theory of buried treasure.
Figures always go with buried treasure. One pace to the right,
seven paces to the left, dig one foot, descend twenty-two steps.
That sort of idea. I could work out that later. The thing was to
get to Kilmorden Castle as quickly as possible.

I made a strategic sally from my room and returned laden with books
of reference. _Who’s Who_, Whitaker, a Gazetteer, a History of
Scotch Ancestral Homes, and Somebody or other’s British Isles.

Time passed. I searched diligently, but with growing annoyance.
Finally, I shut the last book with a bang. There appeared to be no
such place as Kilmorden Castle. Here was an unexpected check. There
_must_ be such a place. Why should any one invent a name like that
and write it down on a piece of paper? Absurd!

Another idea occurred to me. Possibly it was a castellated
abomination in the suburbs with a high-sounding name invented by
its owner. But if so, it was going to be extraordinarily hard to
find. I sat back gloomily on my heels (I always sit on the floor
to do anything really important) and wondered how on earth I was
to set about it.

Was there any other line I could follow? I reflected earnestly and
then sprang to my feet delightedly. Of course! I must visit the
“scene of the crime.” Always done by the best sleuths! And no
matter how long afterwards it may be, they always find something
that the police have overlooked. My course was clear. I must go to
Marlow.

But how was I to get into the house? I discarded several adventurous
methods, and plumped for stern simplicity. The house had been to
let—presumably was still to let. I would be a prospective tenant.

I also decided on attacking the local house-agents, as having fewer
houses on their books.

Here, however, I reckoned without my host. A pleasant clerk produced
particulars of about half a dozen desirable properties. It took
all my ingenuity to find objections to them. In the end I feared
I had drawn a blank.

“And you’ve really nothing else?” I asked, gazing pathetically into
the clerk’s eyes. “Something right on the river, and with a fair
amount of garden and a small lodge,” I added, summing up the main
points of the Mill House, as I had gathered them from the papers.

“Well, of course there’s Sir Eustace Pedler’s place,” said the man
doubtfully. “The Mill House, you know.”

“Not—not where——” I faltered. (Really, faltering is getting to be
my strong point.)

“That’s it! Where the murder took place. But perhaps you wouldn’t
like——”

“Oh, I don’t think I should mind,” I said with an appearance of
rallying. I felt my _bona fides_ was now quite established. “And
perhaps I might get it cheap—in the circumstances.”

A master touch that, I thought.

“Well, it’s possible. There’s no pretending that it will be easy
to let now—servants and all that, you know. If you like the place
after you’ve seen it, I should advise you to make an offer. Shall
I write you out an order?”

“If you please.”

A quarter of an hour later I was at the lodge of the Mill House.
In answer to my knock, the door flew open and a tall middle-aged
woman literally bounced out.

“Nobody can go into the house, do you hear that? Fairly sick of
you reporters, I am. Sir Eustace’s orders are——”

“I understood the house was to let,” I said freezingly, holding
out my order. “Of course, if it’s already taken——”

“Oh, I’m sure I beg your pardon, miss. I’ve been fairly pestered
with these newspaper people. Not a minute’s peace. No, the house
isn’t let—nor likely to be now.”

“Are the drains wrong?” I asked in an anxious whisper.

“Oh, Lord, miss, the _drains_ is all right! But surely you’ve heard
about that foreign lady as was done to death here?”

“I believe I did read something about it in the papers,” I said
carelessly.

My indifference piqued the good woman. If I had betrayed any
interest, she would probably have closed up like an oyster. As it
was, she positively bridled.

“I should say you did, miss! It’s been in all the newspapers. The
_Daily Budget’s_ out still to catch the man who did it. It seems,
according to them, as our police are no good at all. Well, I hope
they’ll get him—although a nice-looking young fellow he was and no
mistake. A kind of soldierly look about him—ah, well, I dare say
he’d been wounded in the war, and sometimes they go a bit queer
afterwards, my sister’s boy did. Perhaps she’d used him bad—they’re
a bad lot, those foreigners. Though she was a fine-looking woman.
Stood there where you’re standing now.”

“Was she dark or fair?” I ventured. “You can’t tell from these
newspaper portraits.”

“Dark hair, and a very white face—too white for nature, I thought,
and her lips reddened something cruel. I don’t like to see it—a
little powder now and then is quite another thing.”

We were conversing like old friends now. I put another question.

“Did she seem nervous or upset at all?”

“Not a bit. She was smiling to herself, quiet like, as though she
was amused at something. That’s why you could have knocked me down
with a feather when, the next afternoon, those people came running
out calling for the police and saying there’d been murder done. I
shall never get over it, and as for setting foot in that house
after dark I wouldn’t do it, not if it was ever so. Why, I wouldn’t
even stay here at the lodge, if Sir Eustace hadn’t been down on
his bended knees to me.”

“I thought Sir Eustace Pedler was at Cannes?”

“So he was, miss. He come back to England when he heard the news,
and, as to the bended knees, that was a figure of speech, his
secretary, Mr. Pagett, having offered us double pay to stay on,
and, as my John says, money is money nowadays.”

I concurred heartily with John’s by no means original remarks.

“The young man now,” said Mrs. James, reverting suddenly to a
former point in the conversation. “He was upset. His eyes, light
eyes, they were, I noticed them particular, was all shining.
Excited, _I_ thought. But I never dreamt of anything being wrong.
Not even when he came out again looking all queer.”

“How long was he in the house?”

“Oh, not long, a matter of five minutes maybe.”

“How tall was he, do you think? About six foot?”

“I should say so maybe.”

“He was clean-shaven, you say?”

“Yes, miss—not even one of these toothbrush moustaches.”

“Was his chin at all shiny?” I asked on a sudden impulse.

Mrs. James stared at me with awe.

“Well, now you come to mention it, miss, it _was._ However did you
know?”

“It’s a curious thing, but murderers often have shiny chins,” I
explained wildly.

Mrs. James accepted the statement in all good faith.

“Really, now, miss. I never heard that before.”

“You didn’t notice what kind of a head he had, I suppose?”

“Just the ordinary kind, miss. I’ll fetch you the keys, shall I?”

I accepted them, and went on my way to the Mill House. My
reconstructions so far I considered good. All along I had realized
that the differences between the man Mrs. James had described and
my Tube “doctor” were those of non-essentials. An overcoat, a
beard, gold-rimmed eyeglasses. The “doctor” had appeared middle-aged,
but I remembered that he had stooped over the body like a
comparatively young man. There had been a suppleness which told of
young joints.

The victim of the accident (the Moth Ball man, as I called him to
myself) and the foreign woman, Mrs. de Castina, or whatever her
real name was, had had an assignation to meet at the Mill House.
That was how I pieced the thing together. Either because they
feared they were being watched or for some other reason, they chose
the rather ingenious method of both getting an order to view the
same house. Thus their meeting there might have the appearance of
pure chance.

That the Moth Ball man had suddenly caught sight of the “doctor,”
and that the meeting was totally unexpected and alarming to him,
was another fact of which I was fairly sure. What had happened
next? The “doctor” had removed his disguise and followed the woman
to Marlow. But it was possible that had he removed it rather
hastily traces of spirit-gum might still linger on his chin. Hence
my question to Mrs. James.

Whilst occupied with my thoughts I had arrived at the low
old-fashioned door of the Mill House. Unlocking it with the key,
I passed inside. The hall was low and dark, the place smelt forlorn
and mildewy. In spite of myself, I shivered. Did the woman who had
come here “smiling to herself” a few days ago feel no chill of
premonition as she entered this house? I wondered. Did the smile
fade from her lips, and did a nameless dread close round her heart?
Or had she gone upstairs, smiling still, unconscious of the doom
that was so soon to overtake her? My heart beat a little faster.
Was the house really empty? Was doom waiting for me in it also?
For the first time, I understood the meaning of the much-used word,
“atmosphere.” There was an atmosphere in this house, an atmosphere
of cruelty, of menace, of evil.




  CHAPTER VII


Shaking off the feelings that oppressed me, I went quickly upstairs.
I had no difficulty in finding the room of the tragedy. On the day
the body was discovered it had rained heavily, and large muddy
boots had trampled the uncarpeted floor in every direction. I
wondered if the murderer had left any footmarks the previous day.
It was likely that the police would be reticent on the subject if
he had, but on consideration I decided it was unlikely. The weather
had been fine and dry.

There was nothing of interest about the room. It was almost square
with two big bay windows, plain white walls and a bare floor, the
boards being stained round the edges where the carpet had ceased.
I searched it carefully, but there was not so much as a pin lying
about. The gifted young detective did not seem likely to discover
a neglected clue.

I had brought with me a pencil and notebook. There did not seem
much to note, but I duly dotted down a brief sketch of the room to
cover my disappointment at the failure of my quest. As I was in
the act of returning the pencil to my bag, it slipped from my
fingers and rolled along the floor.

The Mill House was really old, and the floors were very uneven.
The pencil rolled steadily, with increasing momentum, until it came
to rest under one of the windows. In the recess of each window
there was a broad window-seat, underneath which there was a
cupboard. My pencil was lying right against the cupboard door. The
cupboard was shut, but it suddenly occurred to me that if it had
been open my pencil would have rolled inside. I opened the door,
and my pencil immediately rolled in and sheltered modestly in the
farthest corner. I retrieved it, noting as I did so that owing to
the lack of light and the peculiar formation of the cupboard one
could not see it, but had to feel for it. Apart from my pencil the
cupboard was empty, but being thorough by nature I tried the one
under the opposite window.

At first sight, it looked as though that also was empty, but I
grubbed about perseveringly, and was rewarded by feeling my hand
close on a hard paper cylinder which lay in a sort of trough, or
depression, in the far corner of the cupboard. As soon as I had it
in my hand, I knew what it was. A roll of Kodak films. Here was a
find!

I realized, of course, that these films might very well be an old
roll belonging to Sir Eustace Pedler which had rolled in here and
had not been found when the cupboard was emptied. But I did not
think so. The red paper was far too fresh-looking. It was just as
dusty as it would have been had it laid there for two or three
days—that is to say, since the murder. Had it been there for any
length of time, it would have been thickly coated.

Who had dropped it? The woman or the man? I remembered that the
contents of her handbag had appeared to be intact. If it had been
jerked open in the struggle and the roll of films had fallen out,
surely some of the loose money would have been scattered about
also? No, it was not the woman who had dropped the films.

I sniffed suddenly and suspiciously. Was the smell of moth balls
becoming an obsession with me? I could swear that the roll of films
smelt of it also? I held them under my nose. They had, as usual,
a strong smell of their own, but apart from that I could clearly
detect the odour I disliked so much. I soon found the cause. A
minute shred of cloth had caught on a rough edge of the centre
wood, and that shred was strongly impregnated with moth balls. At
some time or another the films had been carried in the overcoat
pocket of the man who was killed in the Tube. Was it he who had
dropped them here? Hardly. His movements were all accounted for.

No, it was the other man, the “doctor.” He had taken the films when
he had taken the paper. It was he who had dropped them here during
his struggle with the woman.

I had got my clue! I would have the roll developed, and then I
would have further developments to work upon.

Very elated, I left the house, returned the keys to Mrs. James and
made my way as quickly as possible to the station. On the way back
to town, I took out my paper and studied it afresh. Suddenly the
figures took on a new significance. Suppose they were a date? 17
1 22. The 17th of January, 1922. Surely that must be it! Idiot that
I was not to have thought of it before. But in that case I _must_
find out the whereabouts of Kilmorden Castle, for to-day was
actually the 14th. Three days. Little enough—almost hopeless when
one had no idea of where to look!

It was too late to hand in my roll to-day. I had to hurry home to
Kensington so as not to be late for dinner. It occurred to me that
there was an easy way of verifying whether some of my conclusions
were correct. I asked Mr. Flemming whether there had been a camera
amongst the dead man’s belongings. I knew that he had taken an
interest in the case and was conversant with all the details.

To my surprise and annoyance he replied that there had been no
camera. All Carton’s effects had been gone over very carefully in
the hopes of finding something that might throw light upon his
state of mind. He was positive that there had been no photographic
apparatus of any kind.

That was rather a set-back to my theory. If he had no camera, why
should he be carrying a roll of films?

I set out early next morning to take my precious roll to be
developed. I was so fussy that I went all the way to Regent Street
to the big Kodak place. I handed it in and asked for a print of
each film. The man finished stacking together a heap of films
packed in yellow tin cylinders for the tropics, and picked up my
roll.

He looked at me.

“You’ve made a mistake, I think,” he said, smiling.

“Oh, no,” I said. “I’m sure I haven’t.”

“You’ve given me the wrong roll. This is an _unexposed_ one.”

I walked out with what dignity I could muster. I dare say it is
good for one now and again to realize what an idiot one can be!
But nobody relishes the process.

And then, just as I was passing one of the big shipping offices,
I came to a sudden halt. In the window was a beautiful model of
one of the company’s boats, and it was labelled “Kenilworth Castle.”
A wild idea shot through my brain. I pushed the door open and went
in. I went up to the counter and in faltering voice (genuine this
time!) I murmured:

“Kilmorden Castle?”

“On the 17th from Southampton. Cape Town? First or second class?”

“How much is it?”

“First class, eighty-seven pounds——”

I interrupted him. The coincidence was too much for me. Exactly
the amount of my legacy! I would put all my eggs in one basket.

“First class,” I said.

I was now definitely committed to the adventure.




  CHAPTER VIII


  _(Extracts from the diary of Sir Eustace Pedler, M.P.)_


It is an extraordinary thing that I never seem to get any peace.
I am a man who likes a quiet life. I like my Club, my rubber of
Bridge, a well-cooked meal, a sound wine. I like England in the
summer, and the Riviera in the winter. I have no desire to
participate in sensational happenings. Sometimes, in front of a
good fire, I do not object to reading about them in the newspaper.
But that is as far as I am willing to go. My object in life is to
be thoroughly comfortable. I have devoted a certain amount of
thought, and a considerable amount of money, to further that end.
But I cannot say that I always succeed. If things do not actually
happen to me, they happen round me, and frequently, in spite of
myself, I become involved. I hate being involved.

All this because Guy Pagett came into my bedroom this morning with
a telegram in his hand and a face as long as a mute at a funeral.

Guy Pagett is my secretary, a zealous, painstaking, hard-working
fellow, admirable in every respect. I know no one who annoys me
more. For a long time I have been racking my brains as to how to
get rid of him. But you cannot very well dismiss a secretary
because he prefers work to play, likes getting up early in the
morning, and has positively no vices. The only amusing thing about
the fellow is his face. He has the face of a fourteenth-century
poisoner—the sort of man the Borgias got to do their odd jobs for
them.

I wouldn’t mind so much if Pagett didn’t make me work too. My idea
of work is something that should be undertaken lightly and
airily—trifled with, in fact! I doubt if Guy Pagett has ever
trifled with anything in his life. He takes everything seriously.
That is what makes him so difficult to live with.

Last week I had the brilliant idea of sending him off to Florence.
He talked about Florence and how much he wanted to go there.

“My dear fellow,” I cried, “you shall go to-morrow. I will pay all
your expenses.”

January isn’t the usual time for going to Florence, but it would
be all one to Pagett. I could imagine him going about, guide-book
in hand, religiously doing all the picture galleries. And a week’s
freedom was cheap to me at the price.

It has been a delightful week. I have done everything I wanted to,
and nothing that I did not want to do. But when I blinked my eyes
open, and perceived Pagett standing between me and the light at
the unearthly hour of 9 a.m. this morning, I realized that freedom
was over.

“My dear fellow,” I said, “has the funeral already taken place, or
is it for later in the morning?”

Pagett does not appreciate dry humour. He merely stared.

“So you know, Sir Eustace?”

“Know what?” I said crossly. “From the expression of your face I
inferred that one of your near and dear relatives was to be interred
this morning.”

Pagett ignored the sally as far as possible.

“I thought you couldn’t know about this.” He tapped the telegram.
“I know you dislike being aroused early—but it _is_ nine
o’clock”—Pagett insists on regarding 9 a.m. as practically the
middle of the day—“and I thought that under the circumstances——”
He tapped the telegram again.

“What is that thing?” I asked.

“It’s a telegram from the police at Marlow. A woman has been
murdered in your house.”

That aroused me in earnest.

“What colossal cheek,” I exclaimed. “Why in _my_ house? Who murdered
her?”

“They don’t say. I suppose we shall go back to England at once,
Sir Eustace?”

“You need suppose nothing of the kind. Why should we go back?”

“The police——”

“What on earth have I to do with the police?”

“Well, it was your house.”

“That,” I said, “appears to be more my misfortune than my fault.”

Guy Pagett shook his head gloomily.

“It will have a very unfortunate effect upon the constituency,” he
remarked lugubriously.

I don’t see why it should have—and yet I have a feeling that in
such matters Pagett’s instincts are always right. On the face of
it, a Member of Parliament will be none the less efficient because
a stray young woman comes and gets herself murdered in an empty
house that belongs to him—but there is no accounting for the view
the respectable British public takes of a matter.

“She’s a foreigner too, and that makes it worse,” continued Pagett
gloomily.

Again I believe he is right. If it is disreputable to have a woman
murdered in your house, it becomes more disreputable if the woman
is a foreigner. Another idea struck me.

“Good heavens,” I exclaimed, “I hope this won’t upset Caroline.”

Caroline is the lady who cooks for me. Incidentally she is the wife
of my gardener. What kind of a wife she makes I do not know, but
she is an excellent cook. James, on the other hand, is not a good
gardener—but I support him in idleness and give him the lodge to
live in solely on account of Caroline’s cooking.

“I don’t suppose she’ll stay after this,” said Pagett.

“You always were a cheerful fellow,” I said.

I expect I shall have to go back to England. Pagett clearly intends
that I shall. And there is Caroline to pacify.

_Three days later._

It is incredible to me that any one who can get away from England
in winter does not do so! It is an abominable climate. All this
trouble is very annoying. The house-agents say it will be next to
impossible to let the Mill House after all the publicity. Caroline
has been pacified—with double pay. We could have sent her a cable
to that effect from Cannes. In fact, as I have said all along,
there was no earthly purpose to serve by our coming over. I shall
go back to-morrow.

_One day later._

Several very surprising things have occurred. To begin with, I met
Augustus Milray, the most perfect example of an old ass the present
Government has produced. His manner oozed diplomatic secrecy as he
drew me aside in the Club into a quiet corner. He talked a good
deal. About South Africa and the industrial situation there. About
the growing rumours of a strike on the Rand. Of the secret causes
actuating that strike. I listened as patiently as I could. Finally,
he dropped his voice to a whisper and explained that certain
documents had come to light which ought to be placed in the hands
of General Smuts.

“I’ve no doubt you’re quite right,” I said, stifling a yawn.

“But how are we to get them to him? Our position in the matter is
delicate—very delicate.”

“What’s wrong with the post?” I said cheerfully. “Put a two-penny
stamp on and drop ’em in the nearest letter-box.”

He seemed quite shocked at the suggestion.

“My dear Pedler! The common post!”

It has always been a mystery to me why Governments employ Kings’
Messengers and draw such attention to their confidential documents.

“If you don’t like the post, send one of your young Foreign Office
fellows. He’ll enjoy the trip.”

“Impossible,” said Milray, wagging his head in a senile fashion.
“There are reasons, my dear Pedler—I assure you there are reasons.”

“Well,” I said, rising, “all this is very interesting, but I must
be off——”

“One minute, my dear Pedler, one minute, I beg of you. Now tell
me, in confidence, is it not true that you intend visiting South
Africa shortly yourself? You have large interests in Rhodesia, I
know, and the question of Rhodesia joining in the Union is one in
which you have a vital interest.”

“Well, I had thought of going out in about a month’s time.”

“You couldn’t possibly make it sooner? This month? This week, in
fact?”

“I could,” I said, eyeing him with some interest. “But I don’t know
that I particularly want to.”

“You would be doing the Government a great service—a very great
service. You would not find them—er—ungrateful.”

“Meaning, you want me to be the postman?”

“Exactly. Your position is an unofficial one, your journey is _bona
fide._ Everything would be eminently satisfactory.”

“Well,” I said slowly, “I don’t mind if I do. The one thing I am
anxious to do is to get out of England again as soon as possible.”

“You will find the climate of South Africa delightful—quite
delightful.”

“My dear fellow, I know all about the climate. I was out there
shortly before the war.”

“I am really much obliged to you, Pedler. I will send you round
the package by messenger. To be placed in General Smuts’s own
hands, you understand? The _Kilmorden Castle_ sails on Saturday—quite
a good boat.”

I accompanied him a short way along Pall Mall before we parted. He
shook me warmly by the hand, and thanked me again effusively.

I walked home reflecting on the curious by-ways of Governmental
policy.

It was the following evening that Jarvis, my butler, informed me
that a gentleman wished to see me on private business, but declined
to give his name. I have always a lively apprehension of insurance
touts, so told Jarvis to say I could not see him. Guy Pagett,
unfortunately, when he might for once have been of real use, was
laid up with a bilious attack. These earnest, hard-working young
men with weak stomachs are always liable to bilious attacks.

Jarvis returned.

“The gentleman asked me to tell you, Sir Eustace, that he comes to
you from Mr. Milray.”

That altered the complexion of things. A few minutes later I was
confronting my visitor in the library. He was a well-built young
fellow with a deeply tanned face. A scar ran diagonally from the
corner of his eye to the jaw, disfiguring what would otherwise have
been a handsome though somewhat reckless countenance.

“Well,” I said, “what’s the matter?”

“Mr. Milray sent me to you, Sir Eustace. I am to accompany you to
South Africa as your secretary.”

“My dear fellow,” I said, “I’ve got a secretary already. I don’t
want another.”

“I think you do, Sir Eustace. Where is your secretary now?”

“He’s down with a bilious attack,” I explained.

“You are sure it’s only a bilious attack?”

“Of course it is. He’s subject to them.”

My visitor smiled.

“It may or may not be a bilious attack. Time will show. But I can
tell you this, Sir Eustace, Mr. Milray would not be surprised if
an attempt were made to get your secretary out of the way. Oh, you
need have no fear for yourself”—I suppose a momentary alarm had
flickered across my face—“you are not threatened. Your secretary
out of the way, access to you would be easier. In any case, Mr.
Milray wishes me to accompany you. The passage-money will be our
affair, of course, but you will take the necessary steps about the
passport, as though you had decided that you needed the services
of a second secretary.”

He seemed a determined young man. We stared at each other and he
stared me down.

“Very well,” I said feebly.

“You will say nothing to any one as to my accompanying you.”

“Very well,” I said again.

After all, perhaps it was better to have this fellow with me, but
I had a premonition that I was getting into deep waters. Just when
I thought I had attained peace!

I stopped my visitor as he was turning to depart.

“It might be just as well if I knew my new secretary’s name,” I
observed sarcastically.

He considered for a minute.

“Harry Rayburn seems quite a suitable name,” he observed.

It was a curious way of putting it.

“Very well,” I said for the third time.




  CHAPTER IX


  _(Anne’s Narrative Resumed)_


It is most undignified for a heroine to be sea-sick. In books the
more it rolls and tosses, the better she likes it. When everybody
else is ill, she alone staggers along the deck, braving the elements
and positively rejoicing in the storm. I regret to say that at the
first roll the _Kilmorden_ gave, I turned pale and hastened below.
A sympathetic stewardess received me. She suggested dry toast and
ginger ale.

I remained groaning in my cabin for three days. Forgotten was my
quest. I had no longer any interest in solving mysteries. I was a
totally different Anne to the one who had rushed back to the South
Kensington square so jubilantly from the shipping office.

I smile now as I remember my abrupt entry into the drawing-room.
Mrs. Flemming was alone there. She turned her head as I entered.

“Is that you, Anne, my dear? There is something I want to talk over
with you.”

“Yes?” I said, curbing my impatience.

“Miss Emery is leaving me.” Miss Emery was the governness. “As you
have not yet succeeded in finding anything, I wondered if you would
care—it would be so nice if you remained with us altogether?”

I was touched. She didn’t want me, I knew. It was sheer Christian
charity that prompted the offer. I felt remorseful for my secret
criticism of her. Getting up, I ran impulsively across the room
and flung my arms round her neck.

“You’re a dear,” I said. “A dear, a dear, a dear! And thank you
ever so much. But it’s all right, I’m off to South Africa on
Saturday.”

My abrupt onslaught had startled the good lady. She was not used
to sudden demonstrations of affection. My words startled her still
more.

“To South Africa? My dear Anne. We would have to look into anything
of that kind very carefully.”

That was the last thing I wanted. I explained that I had already
taken my passage, and that upon arrival I proposed to take up the
duties of a parlourmaid. It was the only thing I could think of on
the spur of the moment. There was, I said, a great demand for
parlourmaids in South Africa. I assured her that I was equal to
taking care of myself, and in the end, with a sigh of relief at
getting me off her hands, she accepted the project without further
query. At parting, she slipped an envelope into my hand. Inside it
I found five new crisp five-pound notes and the words: “I hope you
will not be offended and will accept this with my love.” She was
a very good, kind woman. I could not have continued to live in the
same house with her, but I did recognize her intrinsic worth.

So here I was, with twenty-five pounds in my pocket, facing the
world and pursuing my adventure.

It was on the fourth day that the stewardess finally urged me up
on deck. Under the impression that I should die quicker below, I
had steadfastly refused to leave my bunk. She now tempted me with
the advent of Madeira. Hope rose in my breast. I could leave the
boat and go ashore and be a parlourmaid there. Anything for dry
land.

Muffled in coats and rugs, and weak as a kitten on my legs, I was
hauled up and deposited, an inert mass, on a deck-chair. I lay
there with my eyes closed, hating life. The purser, a fair-haired
young man, with a round boyish face, came and sat down beside me.

“Hullo! Feeling rather sorry for yourself, eh?”

“Yes,” I replied, hating him.

“Ah, you won’t know yourself in another day or two. We’ve had
rather a nasty dusting in the Bay, but there’s smooth weather
ahead. I’ll be taking you on at quoits to-morrow.”

I did not reply.

“Think you’ll never recover, eh? But I’ve seen people much worse
than you, and two days later they were the life and soul of the
ship. You’ll be the same.”

I did not feel sufficiently pugnacious to tell him outright that
he was a liar. I endeavoured to convey it by a glance. He chatted
pleasantly for a few minutes more, then he mercifully departed.
People passed and repassed, brisk couples “exercising,” curveting
children, laughing young people. A few other pallid sufferers lay,
like myself, in deck-chairs.

The air was pleasant, crisp, not too cold, and the sun was shining
brightly. Insensibly, I felt a little cheered. I began to watch
the people. One woman in particular attracted me. She was about
thirty, of medium height and very fair with a round dimpled face
and very blue eyes. Her clothes, though perfectly plain, had that
indefinable air of “cut” about them which spoke of Paris. Also, in
a pleasant but self-possessed way, she seemed to own the ship!

Deck stewards ran to and fro obeying her commands. She had a
special deck-chair, and an apparently inexhaustible supply of
cushions. She changed her mind three times as to where she would
like it placed. Throughout everything she remained attractive and
charming. She appeared to be one of those rare people in the world
who know what they want, see that they get it, and manage to do so
without being offensive. I decided that if I ever recovered—but of
course I shouldn’t—it would amuse me to talk to her.

We reached Madeira about midday. I was still too inert to move,
but I enjoyed the picturesque-looking merchants who came on board
and spread their merchandise about the decks. There were flowers
too. I buried my nose in an enormous bunch of sweet wet violets
and felt distinctly better. In fact, I thought I might just possibly
last out the end of the voyage. When my stewardess spoke of the
attractions of a little chicken broth, I only protested feebly.
When it came I enjoyed it.

My attractive woman had been ashore. She came back escorted by a
tall, soldierly-looking man with dark hair and a bronzed face whom
I had noticed striding up and down the deck earlier in the day. I
put him down at once as one of the strong, silent men of Rhodesia.
He was about forty, with a touch of greying hair at either temple,
and was easily the best-looking man on board.

When the stewardess brought me up an extra rug I asked her if she
knew who my attractive woman was.

“That’s a well-known society lady, the Hon. Mrs. Clarence Blair.
You must have read about her in the papers.”

I nodded, looking at her with renewed interest. Mrs. Blair was very
well known indeed as one of the smartest women of the day. I
observed, with some amusement, that she was the centre of a good
deal of attention. Several people essayed to scrape acquaintance
with the pleasant informality that a boat allows. I admired the
polite way that Mrs. Blair snubbed them. She appeared to have
adopted the strong, silent man as her special cavalier, and he
seemed duly sensible of the privilege accorded him.

The following morning, to my surprise, after taking a few turns
round the deck with her attentive companion, Mrs. Blair came to a
halt by my chair.

“Feeling better this morning?”

I thanked her, and said I felt slightly more like a human being.

“You did look ill yesterday. Colonel Race and I decided that we
should have the excitement of a funeral at sea—but you’ve
disappointed us.”

I laughed.

“Being up in the air has done me good.”

“Nothing like fresh air,” said Colonel Race, smiling.

“Being shut up in those stuffy cabins would kill any one,” declared
Mrs. Blair, dropping into a seat by my side and dismissing her
companion with a little nod. “You’ve got an outside one, I hope?”

I shook my head.

“My dear girl! Why don’t you change? There’s plenty of room. A lot
of people got off at Madeira, and the boat’s very empty. Talk to
the purser about it. He’s a nice little boy—he changed me into a
beautiful cabin because I didn’t care for the one I’d got. You talk
to him at lunch-time when you go down.”

I shuddered.

“I couldn’t move.”

“Don’t be silly. Come and take a walk now with me.”

She dimpled at me encouragingly. I felt very weak on my legs at
first, but as we walked briskly up and down I began to feel a
brighter and better being.

After a turn or two, Colonel Race joined us again.

“You can see the Grand Peak of Tenerife from the other side.”

“Can we? Can I get a photograph of it, do you think?”

“No—but that won’t deter you from snapping off at it.”

Mrs. Blair laughed.

“You are unkind. Some of my photographs are very good.”

“About three per cent effective, I should say.”

We all went round to the other side of the deck. There glimmering
white and snowy, enveloped in a delicate rose-coloured mist, rose
the glistening pinnacle. I uttered an exclamation of delight. Mrs.
Blair ran for her camera.

Undeterred by Colonel Race’s sardonic comments, she snapped
vigorously:

“There, that’s the end of the roll. Oh,” her tone changed to one
of chagrin, “I’ve had the thing at ‘bulb’ all the time.”

“I always like to see a child with a new toy,” murmured the Colonel.

“How horrid you are—but I’ve got another roll.”

She produced it in triumph from the pocket of her sweater. A sudden
roll of the boat upset her balance, and as she caught at the rail
to steady herself the roll of films flashed over the side.

“Oh!” cried Mrs. Blair, comically dismayed. She leaned over. “Do
you think they have gone overboard?”

“No, you may have been fortunate enough to brain an unlucky steward
in the deck below.”

A small boy who had arrived unobserved a few paces to our rear blew
a deafening blast on a bugle.

“Lunch,” declared Mrs. Blair ecstatically. “I’ve had nothing to
eat since breakfast, except two cups of beef-tea. Lunch, Miss
Beddingfeld?”

“Well,” I said waveringly. “Yes, I _do_ feel rather hungry.”

“Splendid. You’re sitting at the purser’s table, I know. Tackle
him about the cabin.”

I found my way down to the saloon, began to eat gingerly, and
finished by consuming an enormous meal. My friend of yesterday
congratulated me on my recovery. Every one was changing cabins
to-day, he told me, and he promised that my things should be moved
to an outside one without delay.

There were only four at our table, myself, a couple of elderly
ladies, and a missionary who talked a lot about “our poor black
brothers.”

I looked round at the other tables. Mrs. Blair was sitting at the
Captain’s table, Colonel Race next to her. On the other side of
the Captain was a distinguished-looking, grey-haired man. A good
many people I had already noticed on deck, but there was one man
who had not previously appeared. Had he done so, he could hardly
have escaped my notice. He was tall and dark, and had such a
peculiarly sinister type of countenance that I was quite startled.
I asked the purser, with some curiosity, who he was.

“That man? Oh, that’s Sir Eustace Pedler’s secretary. Been very
sea-sick, poor chap, and not appeared before. Sir Eustace has got
two secretaries with him, and the sea’s been too much for both of
them. The other fellow hasn’t turned up yet. This man’s name is
Pagett.”

So Sir Eustace Pedler, the owner of the Mill House, was on board.
Probably only a coincidence, and yet——

“That’s Sir Eustace,” my informant continued, “sitting next to the
Captain. Pompous old ass.”

The more I studied the secretary’s face, the less I liked it. Its
even pallor, the secretive, heavy-lidded eyes, the curiously
flattened head—it all gave me a feeling of distaste, of apprehension.

Leaving the saloon at the same time as he did, I was close behind
him as he went up on deck. He was speaking to Sir Eustace, and I
overheard a fragment or two. “I’ll see about the cabin at once
then, shall I? It’s impossible to work in yours, with all your
trunks.”

“My dear fellow,” Sir Eustace replied. “My cabin is intended (a)
for me to sleep in, and (b) to attempt to dress in. I never had
any intentions of allowing you to sprawl about the place making an
infernal clicking with that typewriter of yours.”

“That’s just what I say, Sir Eustace, we must have somewhere to
work——”

Here I parted company from them, and went below to see if my
removal was in progress. I found my steward busy at the task.

“Very nice cabin, miss. On D deck. No. 13.”

“Oh, no!” I cried. “_Not_ 13.”

Thirteen is the one thing I am superstitious about. It was a nice
cabin too. I inspected it, wavered, but a foolish superstition
prevailed. I appealed almost tearfully to the steward.

“Isn’t there any other cabin I can have?”

The steward reflected.

“Well, there’s 17, just along on the starboard side. That was empty
this morning, but I rather fancy it’s been allotted to some one.
Still, as the gentleman’s things aren’t in yet, and as gentlemen
aren’t anything like so superstitious as ladies, I dare say he
wouldn’t mind changing.”

I hailed the proposition gratefully, and the steward departed to
obtain permission from the purser. He returned grinning.

“That’s all right, miss. We can go along.”

He led the way to 17. It was not quite as large as No. 13, but I
found it eminently satisfactory.

“I’ll fetch your things right away, miss,” said the steward.

But at that moment, the man with the sinister face (as I had
nicknamed him) appeared in the doorway.

“Excuse me,” he said, “but this cabin is reserved for the use of
Sir Eustace Pedler.”

“That’s all right, sir,” explained the steward. “We’re fitting up
No. 13 instead.”

“No, it was No. 17 I was to have.”

“No. 13 is a better cabin, sir—larger.”

“I specially selected No. 17, and the purser said I could have it.”

“I’m sorry,” I said coldly. “But No. 17 has been allotted to me.”

“I can’t agree to that.”

The steward put in his oar.

“The other cabin’s just the same, only better.”

“I want No. 17.”

“What’s all this?” demanded a new voice. “Steward, put my things
in here. This is my cabin.”

It was my neighbor at lunch, the Rev. Edward Chichester.

“I beg your pardon,” I said. “It’s my cabin.”

“It is allotted to Sir Eustace Pedler,” said Mr. Pagett.

We were all getting rather heated.

“I’m sorry to have to dispute the matter,” said Chichester with a
meek smile which failed to mask his determination to get his own
way. Meek men are always obstinate, I have noticed.

He edged himself sideways into the doorway.

“You’re to have No. 28 on the port side,” said the steward. “A very
good cabin, sir.”

“I am afraid that I must insist. No. 17 was the cabin promised to
me.”

We had come to an impasse. Each one of us was determined not to
give way. Strictly speaking, I, at any rate, might have retired
from the contest and eased matters by offering to accept Cabin 28.
So long as I did not have 13 it was immaterial to me what other
cabin I had. But my blood was up. I had not the least intention of
being the first to give way. And I disliked Chichester. He had
false teeth which clicked when he ate. Many men have been hated
for less.

We all said the same things over again. The steward assured us,
even more strongly, that both the other cabins were better cabins.
None of us paid any attention to him.

Pagett began to lose his temper. Chichester kept his serenely. With
an effort I also kept mine. And still none of us would give way an
inch.

A wink and a whispered word from the steward gave me my cue. I
faded unobtrusively from the scene. I was lucky enough to encounter
the purser almost immediately.

“Oh, please,” I said, “you did say I could have Cabin 17? And the
others won’t go away. Mr. Chichester and Mr. Pagett. You _will_
let me have it, won’t you?”

I always say that there are no people like sailors for being nice
to women. My little purser came to the scratch splendidly. He
strode to the scene, informed the disputants that No. 17 was my
cabin, they could have Nos. 13 and 28 respectively or stay where
they were—whichever they chose.

I permitted my eyes to tell him what a hero he was and then
installed myself in my new domain. The encounter had done me worlds
of good. The sea was smooth, the weather growing daily warmer.
Sea-sickness was a thing of the past!

I went up on deck and was initiated into the mysteries of
deck-quoits. I entered my name for various sports. Tea was served
on deck, and I ate heartily. After tea, I played shovel-board with
some pleasant young men. They were extraordinarily nice to me. I
felt that life was satisfactory and delightful.

The dressing bugle came as a surprise and I hurried to my new
cabin. The stewardess was awaiting me with a troubled face.

“There’s a terrible smell in your cabin, miss. What it is, I’m sure
I can’t think, but I doubt if you’ll be able to sleep here. There’s
a deck cabin up on C deck, I believe. You might move into that—just
for the night, anyway.”

The smell really was pretty bad—quite nauseating. I told the
stewardess I would think over the question of moving whilst I
dressed. I hurried over my toilet, sniffing distastefully as I did
so.

What _was_ the smell? Dead rat? No, worse than that—and quite
different. Yet I knew it! It was something I had smelt before.
Something——Ah! I had got it. Asafœtida! I had worked in a Hospital
dispensary during the war for a short time and had become acquainted
with various nauseous drugs.

Asafœtida, that was it. But how——

I sank down on the sofa, suddenly realizing the thing. Somebody
had put a pinch of asafœtida in my cabin. Why? So that I should
vacate it? Why were they so anxious to get me out? I thought of
the scene this afternoon from a rather different point of view.
What was there about Cabin 17 that made so many people anxious to
get hold of it? The other two cabins were better cabins, why had
both men insisted on sticking to 17?

17. How the number persisted. It was on the 17th I had sailed from
Southampton. It was a 17—I stopped with a sudden gasp. Quickly I
unlocked my suit-case, and took my precious paper from its place
of concealment in some rolled stockings.

17 1 22—I had taken that for a date, the date of departure of the
_Kilmorden Castle._ Supposing I was wrong. When I came to think of
it, would any one, writing down a date, think it necessary to put
the year as well as the month? Supposing 17 meant _Cabin_ 17? And
1? The time—one o’clock. Then 22 must be the date. I looked up at
my little almanac.

To-morrow was the 22nd!




  CHAPTER X


I was violently excited. I was sure that I had hit on the right
trail at last. One thing was clear, I must not move out of the
cabin. The asafœtida had got to be borne. I examined my facts
again.

To-morrow was the 22nd, and at 1 a.m. or 1 p.m. something would
happen. I plumped for 1 a.m. It was now seven o’clock. In six hours
I should know.

I don’t know how I got through the evening. I retired to my cabin
fairly early. I had told the stewardess that I had a cold in the
head and didn’t mind smells. She still seemed distressed, but I
was firm.

The evening seemed interminable. I duly retired to bed, but in view
of emergencies I swathed myself in a thick flannel dressing-gown,
and encased my feet in slippers. Thus attired I felt that I could
spring up and take an active part in anything that happened.

What did I expect to happen? I hardly knew. Vague fancies, most of
them wildly improbable, flitted through my brain. But one thing I
was firmly convinced of, at one o’clock _something_ would happen.

At various times, I heard my fellow-passengers coming to bed.
Fragments of conversation, laughing good-nights, floated in through
the open transom. Then, silence. Most of the lights went out. There
was still one in the passage outside, and there was therefore a
certain amount of light in my cabin. I heard eight bells go. The
hour that followed seemed the longest I had ever known. I consulted
my watch surreptitiously to be sure I had not overshot the time.

If my deductions were wrong, if nothing happened at one o’clock,
I should have made a fool of myself, and spent all the money I had
in the world on a mare’s-nest. My heart beat painfully.

Two bells went overhead. One o’clock! And nothing. Wait—what was
that? I heard the quick light patter of feet running—running along
the passage.

Then with the suddenness of a bombshell my cabin door burst open
and a man almost fell inside.

“Save me,” he said hoarsely. “They’re after me.”

It was not a moment for argument or explanation. I could hear
footsteps outside. I had about forty seconds in which to act. I
had sprung to my feet and was standing facing the stranger in the
middle of the cabin.

A cabin does not abound in hiding-places for a six-foot man. With
one arm I pulled out my cabin trunk. He slipped down behind it
under the bunk. I raised the lid. At the same time, with the other
hand I pulled down the wash-basin. A deft movement and my hair was
screwed into a tiny knot on the top of my head. From the point of
view of appearance it was inartistic, from another standpoint it
was supremely artistic. A lady, with her hair screwed into an
unbecoming knob and in the act of removing a piece of soap from
her trunk with which, apparently to wash her neck, could hardly be
suspected of harbouring a fugitive.

There was a knock at the door, and without waiting for me to say,
“Come in,” it was pushed open.

I don’t know what I expected to see. I think I had vague ideas of
Mr. Pagett brandishing a revolver. Or my missionary friend with a
sandbag, or some other lethal weapon. But certainly I did not
expect to see a night stewardess, with an inquiring face and
looking the essence of respectability.

“I beg your pardon, miss, I thought you called out.”

“No,” I said, “I didn’t.”

“I’m sorry for interrupting you.”

“That’s all right,” I said. “I couldn’t sleep. I thought a wash
would do me good.” It sounded rather as though it were a thing I
never had as a general rule.

“I’m so sorry, miss,” said the stewardess again. “But there’s a
gentleman about who’s rather drunk, and we are afraid he might get
into one of the ladies’ cabins and frighten them.”

“How dreadful,” I said, looking alarmed. “He won’t come in here,
will he?”

“Oh, I don’t think so, miss. Ring the bell if he does. Good night.”

“Good night.”

I opened the door and peeped down the corridor. Except for the
retreating form of the stewardess, there was nobody in sight.

Drunk! So that was the explanation of it. My histrionic talents
had been wasted. I pulled the cabin trunk out a little farther and
said:

“Come out at once, please,” in an acid voice.

There was no answer. I peered under the bunk. My visitor lay
immovable. He seemed to be asleep. I tugged at his shoulder. He
did not move.

“Dead drunk,” I thought vexedly. “What _am_ I to do?”

Then I saw something that made me catch my breath, a small scarlet
spot on the floor.

Using all my strength, I succeeded in dragging the man out into
the middle of the cabin. The dead whiteness of his face showed that
he had fainted. I found the cause of his fainting easily enough.
He had been stabbed under the left shoulder-blade—a nasty deep
wound. I got his coat off and set to work to attend to it.

At the sting of the cold water he stirred, then sat up.

“Keep still, please,” I said.

He was the kind of young man who recovers his faculties very
quickly. He pulled himself to his feet and stood there swaying a
little.

“Thank you, I don’t need anything done for me.”

His manner was defiant, almost aggressive. Not a word of thanks—of
even common gratitude!

“That is a nasty wound. You must let me dress it.”

“You will do nothing of the kind.”

He flung the words in my face as though I had been begging a favour
of him. My temper, never placid, rose.

“I cannot congratulate you upon your manners,” I said coldly.

“I can at least relieve you of my presence.” He started for the
door, but reeled as he did so. With an abrupt movement I pushed
him down upon the sofa.

“Don’t be a fool,” I said unceremoniously. “You don’t want to go
bleeding all over the ship, do you?”

He seemed to see the sense of that, for he sat quietly whilst I
bandaged up the wound as best I could.

“There,” I said, bestowing a pat on my handiwork, “that will have
to do for the present. Are you better tempered now and do you feel
inclined to tell me what it’s all about?”

“I’m sorry that I can’t satisfy your very natural curiosity.”

“Why not?” I said, chagrined.

He smiled nastily.

“If you want a thing broadcasted, tell a woman. Otherwise keep your
mouth shut.”

“Don’t you think I could keep a secret?”

“I don’t think—I know.”

He rose to his feet.

“At any rate,” I said spitefully, “I shall be able to do a little
broadcasting about the events of this evening.”

“I’ve no doubt you will too,” he said indifferently.

“How dare you?” I cried angrily.

We were facing each other, glaring at each other with the ferocity
of bitter enemies. For the first time, I took in the details of
his appearance, the close-cropped dark head, the lean jaw, the scar
on the brown cheek, the curious light grey eyes that looked into
mine with a sort of reckless mockery hard to describe. There was
something dangerous about him.

“You haven’t thanked me yet for saving your life?” I said with
false sweetness.

I hit him there. I saw him flinch distinctly. Intuitively I knew
that he hated above all to be reminded that he owed his life to
me. I didn’t care. I wanted to hurt him. I had never wanted to hurt
any one so much.

“I wish to God you hadn’t!” he said explosively. “I’d be better
dead and out of it.”

“I’m glad you acknowledge the debt. You can’t get out of it. I
saved your life and I’m waiting for you to say ‘Thank you.’”

If looks could have killed, I think he would have liked to kill me
then. He pushed roughly past me. At the door he turned back, and
spoke over his shoulder.

“I shall not thank you—now or at any other time. But I acknowledge
the debt. Some day I will pay it.”

He was gone, leaving me with clenched hands, and my heart beating
like a mill race.




  CHAPTER XI


There were no further excitements that night. I had breakfast in
bed and got up late the next morning. Mrs. Blair hailed me as I
came on deck.

“Good-morning, Gipsy girl, sit down here by me. You look as though
you hadn’t slept well.”

“Why do you call me that?” I asked, as I sat down obediently.

“Do you mind? It suits you somehow. I’ve called you that in my own
mind from the beginning. It’s the gipsy element in you that makes
you so different from any one else. I decided in my own mind that
you and Colonel Race were the only two people on board who wouldn’t
bore me to death to talk to.”

“That’s funny,” I said, “I thought the same about you—only it’s
more understandable in your case. You’re—you’re such an exquisitely
finished product.”

“Not badly put,” said Mrs. Blair, nodding her head. “Tell me all
about yourself, Gipsy girl. Why are you going to South Africa?”

I told her something about Papa’s life work.

“So you’re Charles Beddingfeld’s daughter? I thought you weren’t
a mere provincial Miss! Are you going to Broken Hill to grub up
more skulls?”

“I may,” I said cautiously. “I’ve got other plans as well.”

“What a mysterious minx you are. But you do look tired this morning.
Didn’t you sleep well? I can’t keep awake on board a boat. Ten
hours’ sleep for a fool, they say! I could do with twenty!”

She yawned, looking like a sleepy kitten. “An idiot of a steward
woke me up in the middle of the night to return me that roll of
films I dropped yesterday. He did it in the most melodramatic
manner, stuck his arm through the ventilator and dropped them
nearly in the middle of my tummy. I thought it was a bomb for a
moment!”

“Here’s your Colonel,” I said, as the tall soldierly figure of
Colonel Race appeared on the deck.

“He’s not my Colonel particularly. In fact he admires _you_ very
much, Gipsy girl. So don’t run away.”

“I want to tie something round my head. It will be more comfortable
than a hat.”

I slipped quickly away. For some reason or other I was uncomfortable
with Colonel Race. He was one of the few people who were capable
of making me feel shy.

I went down to my cabin and began looking for a broad band of
ribbon, or a motor-veil, with which I could restrain my rebellious
locks. Now I am a tidy person, I like my things always arranged in
a certain way and I keep them so. I had no sooner opened my drawer
than I realized that somebody had been disarranging my things.
Everything had been turned over and scattered. I looked in the
other drawers and the small hanging cupboard. They told me the same
tale. It was as though some one had been making a hurried and
ineffectual search for something.

I sat down on the edge of the bunk with a grave face. Who had been
searching my cabin and what had they been looking for? Was it the
half-sheet of paper with scribbled figures and words? I shook my
head, dissatisfied. Surely that was past history now. But what else
could there be?

I wanted to think. The events of last night, though exciting, had
not really done anything to elucidate matters. Who was the young
man who had burst into my cabin so abruptly? I had not seen him on
board previously, either on deck or in the saloon. Was he one of
the ship’s company or was he a passenger? Who had stabbed him? Why
had they stabbed him? And why, in the name of goodness, should
Cabin No. 17 figure so prominently? It was all a mystery, but there
was no doubt that some very peculiar occurrences were taking place
on the _Kilmorden Castle._

I counted off on my fingers the people on whom it behoved me to
keep a watch.

Setting aside my visitor of the night before, but promising myself
that I would discover him on board before another day had passed,
I selected the following persons as worthy of my notice.

(1) Sir Eustace Pedler. He was the owner of the Mill House and his
presence on the _Kilmorden Castle_ seemed something of a coincidence.

(2) Mr. Pagett, the sinister-looking secretary, whose eagerness to
obtain Cabin 17 had been so very marked. N.B. Find out whether he
had accompanied Sir Eustace to Cannes.

(3) The Rev. Edward Chichester. All I had against him was his
obstinacy over Cabin 17, and that might be entirely due to his own
peculiar temperament. Obstinacy can be an amazing thing.

But a little conversation with Mr. Chichester would not come amiss,
I decided. Hastily tying a handkerchief round my rebellious locks,
I went up on deck again, full of purpose. I was in luck. My quarry
was leaning against the rail, drinking beef tea. I went up to him.

“I hope you’ve forgiven me over Cabin 17,” I said, with my best
smile.

“I consider it unchristian to bear a grudge,” said Mr. Chichester
coldly. “But the purser had distinctly promised me that cabin.”

“Pursers are such busy men, aren’t they?” I said vaguely. “I
suppose they’re bound to forget sometimes.”

Mr. Chichester did not reply.

“Is this your first visit to Africa?” I inquired conversationally.

“To South Africa, yes. But I have worked for the last two years
amongst the cannibal tribes in the interior of East Africa.”

“How thrilling! Have you had many narrow escapes?”

“Escapes?”

“Of being eaten, I mean?”

“You should not treat sacred subjects with levity, Miss Beddingfeld.”

“I didn’t know that cannibalism was a sacred subject,” I retorted,
stung.

As the words left my lips, another idea struck me. If Mr. Chichester
had indeed spent the last two years in the interior of Africa, how
was it that he was not more sunburnt? His skin was as pink and
white as a baby’s. Surely there was something fishy there? Yet his
manner and voice were so absolutely _it._ Too much so perhaps. Was
he—or was he not—just a little like a _stage_ clergyman?

I cast my mind back to the curates I had known at Little Hampsly.
Some of them I had liked, some of them I had not, but certainly
none of them had been quite like Mr. Chichester. They had been
human—he was a glorified type.

I was debating all this when Sir Eustace Pedler passed down the
deck. Just as he was abreast of Mr. Chichester, he stooped and
picked up a piece of paper which he handed to him, remarking
“You’ve dropped something.”

He passed on without stopping, and so probably did not notice Mr.
Chichester’s agitation. I did. Whatever it was he had dropped, its
recovery agitated him considerably. He turned a sickly green, and
crumpled up the sheet of paper into a ball. My suspicions were
accentuated a hundred-fold.

He caught my eye, and hurried into explanations.

“A—a—fragment of a sermon I was composing,” he said with a sickly
smile.

“Indeed?” I rejoined politely.

A fragment of a sermon, indeed! No, Mr. Chichester—too weak for
words!

He soon left me with a muttered excuse. I wished, oh, how I wished,
that I had been the one to pick up that paper and not Sir Eustace
Pedler! One thing was clear, Mr. Chichester could not be exempted
from my list of suspects. I was inclined to put him top of the
three.

After lunch, when I came up to the lounge for coffee, I noticed
Sir Eustace and Pagett sitting with Mrs. Blair and Colonel Race.
Mrs. Blair welcomed me with a smile, so I went over and joined
them. They were talking about Italy.

“But it _is_ misleading,” Mrs. Blair insisted. _“Aqua calda_
certainly _ought_ to be cold water—not hot.”

“You’re not a Latin scholar,” said Sir Eustace, smiling.

“Men are so superior about their Latin,” said Mrs. Blair. “But all
the same I notice that when you ask them to translate inscriptions
in old churches they can never do it! They hem and haw, and get
out of it somehow.”

“Quite right,” said Colonel Race. “I always do.”

“But I love the Italians,” continued Mrs. Blair. “They’re so
obliging—though even that has its embarrassing side. You ask them
the way somewhere, and instead of saying ‘first to the right,
second to the left’ or something that one could follow, they pour
out a flood of well-meaning directions, and when you look bewildered
they take you kindly by the arm and walk all the way there with
you.”

“Is that your experience in Florence, Pagett?” asked Sir Eustace,
turning with a smile to his secretary.

For some reason the question seemed to disconcert Mr. Pagett. He
stammered and flushed.

“Oh, quite so, yes—er quite so.”

Then with a murmured excuse, he rose and left the table.

“I am beginning to suspect Guy Pagett of having committed some dark
deed in Florence,” remarked Sir Eustace, gazing after his
secretary’s retreating figure. “Whenever Florence or Italy is
mentioned, he changes the subject, or bolts precipitately.”

“Perhaps he murdered some one there,” said Mrs. Blair hopefully.
“He looks—I hope I’m not hurting your feelings, Sir Eustace—but he
does look as though he might murder some one.”

“Yes, pure Cinquecento! It amuses me sometimes—especially when one
knows as well as I do how essentially law-abiding and respectable
the poor fellow really is.”

“He’s been with you some time, hasn’t he, Sir Eustace?” asked
Colonel Race.

“Six years,” said Sir Eustace, with a deep sigh.

“He must be quite invaluable to you,” said Mrs. Blair.

“Oh, invaluable! Yes, quite invaluable.” The poor man sounded even
more depressed, as though the invaluableness of Mr. Pagett was a
secret grief to him. Then he added more briskly: “But his face
should really inspire you with confidence, my dear lady. No
self-respecting murderer would ever consent to look like one.
Crippen, now, I believe, was one of the pleasantest fellows
imaginable.”

“He was caught on a liner, wasn’t he?” murmured Mrs. Blair.

There was a slight rattle behind us. I turned quickly. Mr.
Chichester had dropped his coffee-cup.

Our party soon broke up; Mrs. Blair went below to sleep and I went
out on deck. Colonel Race followed me.

“You’re very elusive, Miss Beddingfeld. I looked for you everywhere
last night at the dance.”

“I went to bed early,” I explained.

“Are you going to run away to-night too? Or are you going to dance
with me?”

“I shall be very pleased to dance with you,” I murmured shyly. “But
Mrs. Blair——”

“Our friend, Mrs. Blair, doesn’t care for dancing.”

“And you do?”

“I care for dancing with you.”

“Oh!” I said nervously.

I was a little afraid of Colonel Race. Nevertheless I was enjoying
myself. This was better than discussing fossilized skulls with
stuffy old professors! Colonel Race was really just my ideal of a
stern silent Rhodesian. Possibly I might marry him! I hadn’t been
asked, it is true, but, as the Boy Scouts say, Be Prepared! And
all women, without in the least meaning it, consider every man they
meet as a possible husband for themselves or for their best friend.

I danced several times with him that evening. He danced well. When
the dancing was over, and I was thinking of going to bed, he
suggested a turn round the deck. We walked round three times and
finally subsided into two deck-chairs. There was nobody else in
sight. We made desultory conversation for some time.

“Do you know, Miss Beddingfeld, I think that I once met your
father? A very interesting man—on his own subject, and it’s a
subject that has a special fascination for me. In my humble way,
I’ve done a bit in that line myself. Why, when I was in the Dordogne
region——”

Our talk became technical. Colonel Race’s boast was not an idle
one. He knew a great deal. At the same time, he made one or two
curious mistakes—slips of the tongue, I might almost have thought
them. But he was quick to take his cue from me and to cover them
up. Once he spoke of the Mousterian period as succeeding the
Aurignacian—an absurd mistake for one who knew anything of the
subject.

It was twelve o’clock when I went to my cabin. I was still puzzling
over those queer discrepancies. Was it possible that he had “got
the whole subject up” for the occasion—that really he knew nothing
of archaeology? I shook my head, vaguely dissatisfied with that
solution.

Just as I was dropping off to sleep, I sat up with a sudden start
as another idea flashed into my head. Had _he_ been pumping _me?_
Were those slight inaccuracies just tests—to see whether I really
knew what I was talking about? In other words, he suspected me of
not being genuinely Anne Beddingfeld.

Why?




  CHAPTER XII


  _(Extract from the diary of Sir Eustace Pedler)_


There is something to be said for life on board ship. It is
peaceful. My grey hairs fortunately exempt me from the indignities
of bobbing for apples, running up and down the deck with potatoes
and eggs, and the more painful sports of “Brother Bill” and Bolster
Bar. What amusement people can find in these painful proceedings
has always been a mystery to me. But there are many fools in the
world. One praises God for their existence and keeps out of their
way.

Fortunately I am an excellent sailor. Pagett, poor fellow, is not.
He began turning green as soon as we were out of the Solent. I
presume my other so-called secretary is also sea-sick. At any rate
he has not yet made his appearance. But perhaps it is not
sea-sickness, but high diplomacy. The great thing is that I have
not been worried by him.

On the whole, the people on board are a mangy lot. Only two decent
Bridge players and one decent-looking woman—Mrs. Clarence Blair.
I’ve met her in town of course. She is one of the only women I know
who can lay claim to a sense of humour. I enjoy talking to her,
and should enjoy it more if it were not for a long-legged taciturn
ass who has attached himself to her like a limpet. I cannot think
that this Colonel Race really amuses her. He’s good-looking in his
way, but dull as ditch water. One of these strong silent men that
lady novelists and young girls always rave over.

Guy Pagett struggled up on deck after we left Madeira and began
babbling in a hollow voice about work. What the devil does any one
want to work for on board ship? It is true that I promised my
publishers my “Reminiscences” early in the summer, but what of it?
Who really reads reminiscences? Old ladies in the suburbs. And what
do my reminiscences amount to? I’ve knocked against a certain
number of so-called famous people in my lifetime. With the
assistance of Pagett, I invent insipid anecdotes about them. And,
the truth of the matter is, Pagett is too honest for the job. He
won’t let me invent anecdotes about the people I might have met
but haven’t.

I tried kindness with him.

“You look a perfect wreck still, my dear chap,” I said easily.
“What you need is a deck-chair in the sun. No—not another word.
The work must wait.”

The next thing I knew he was worrying about an extra cabin. “There’s
no room to work in your cabin, Sir Eustace. It’s full of trunks.”

From his tone, you might have thought that trunks were blackbeetles,
something that had no business to be there.

I explained to him that, though he might not be aware of the fact,
it was usual to take a change of clothing with one when travelling.
He gave the wan smile with which he always greets my attempts at
humour, and then reverted to the business in hand.

“And we could hardly work in my little hole.”

I know Pagett’s “little holes”—he usually has the best cabin on
the ship.

“I’m sorry the Captain didn’t turn out for you this time,” I said
sarcastically. “Perhaps you’d like to dump some of your extra
luggage in my cabin?”

Sarcasm is dangerous with a man like Pagett. He brightened up at
once.

“Well, if I could get rid of the typewriter and the stationery
trunk——”

The stationery trunk weighs several solid tons. It causes endless
unpleasantness with the porters, and it is the aim of Pagett’s life
to foist it on me. It is a perpetual struggle between us. He seems
to regard it as my special personal property. I, on the other hand,
regard the charge of it as the only thing where a secretary is
really useful.

“We’ll get an extra cabin,” I said hastily.

The thing seemed simple enough, but Pagett is a person who loves
to make mysteries. He came to me the next day with a face like a
Renaissance conspirator.

“You know you told me to get Cabin 17 for an office?”

“Well, what of it? Has the stationery trunk jammed in the doorway?”

“The doorways are the same size in all the cabins,” replied Pagett
seriously. “But I tell you, Sir Eustace, there’s something very
queer about that cabin.”

Memories of reading _The Upper Berth_ floated through my mind.

“If you mean that it’s haunted,” I said, “we’re not going to sleep
there, so I don’t see that it matters. Ghosts don’t affect
typewriters.”

Pagett said that it wasn’t a ghost, and that, after all, he hadn’t
got Cabin 17. He told me a long, garbled story. Apparently he, and
a Mr. Chichester, and a girl called Beddingfeld, had almost come
to blows over the cabin. Needless to say, the girl had won, and
Pagett was apparently feeling sore over the matter.

“Both 13 and 28 are better cabins,” he reiterated. “But they
wouldn’t look at them.”

“Well,” I said, stifling a yawn, “for that matter, no more would
you, my dear Pagett.”

He gave me a reproachful look.

“You _told_ me to get Cabin 17.”

There is a touch of the “boy upon the burning deck” about Pagett.

“My dear fellow,” I said testily, “I mentioned No. 17 because I
happened to observe that it was vacant. But I didn’t mean you to
make a stand to the death about it—13 or 28 would have done us
equally well.”

He looked hurt.

“There’s something more, though,” he insisted. “Miss Beddingfeld
got the cabin, but this morning I saw Chichester coming out of it
in a furtive sort of way.”

I looked at him severely.

“If you’re trying to get up a nasty scandal about Chichester, who
is a missionary—though a perfectly poisonous person—and that
attractive child, Anne Beddingfeld, I don’t believe a word of it,”
I said coldly. “Anne Beddingfeld is an extremely nice girl—with
particularly good legs. I should say she had far and away the best
legs on board.”

Pagett did not like my reference to Anne Beddingfeld’s legs. He is
the sort of man who never notices legs himself—or, if he does,
would die sooner than say so. Also he thinks my appreciation of
such things frivolous. I like annoying Pagett, so I continued
maliciously:

“As you’ve made her acquaintance, you might ask her to dine at our
table to-morrow night. It’s the Fancy Dress dance. By the way,
you’d better go down to the barber and select a fancy costume for
me.”

“Surely you will not go in fancy dress?” said Pagett, in tones of
horror.

I could see that it was quite incompatible with his idea of my
dignity. He looked shocked and pained. I had really had no intention
of donning fancy dress, but the complete discomfiture of Pagett
was too tempting to be forborne.

“What do you mean?” I said. “Of course I shall wear fancy dress.
So will you.”

Pagett shuddered.

“So go down to the barber’s and see about it,” I finished.

“I don’t think he’ll have any out sizes,” murmured Pagett, measuring
my figure with his eye.

Without meaning it, Pagett can occasionally be extremely offensive.

“And order a table for six in the saloon,” I said. “We’ll have the
Captain, the girl with the nice legs, Mrs. Blair——”

“You won’t get Mrs. Blair without Colonel Race,” Pagett interposed.
“He’s asked her to dine with him, I know.”

Pagett always knows everything. I was justifiably annoyed.

“Who _is_ Race?” I demanded, exasperated.

As I said before, Pagett always knows everything—or thinks he does.
He looked mysterious again.

“They say he’s a Secret Service chap, Sir Eustace. Rather a great
gun too. But of course I don’t know for certain.”

“Isn’t that like the Government?” I exclaimed. “Here’s a man on
board whose business it is to carry about secret documents, and
they go giving them to a peaceful outsider, who only asks to be
let alone.”

Pagett looked even more mysterious. He came a pace nearer and
dropped his voice.

“If you ask me, the whole thing is very queer, Sir Eustace. Look
at that illness of mine before we started——”

“My dear fellow,” I interrupted brutally, “that was a bilious
attack. You’re always having bilious attacks.”

Pagett winced slightly.

“It wasn’t the usual sort of bilious attack. This time——

“For God’s sake, don’t go into the details of your condition,
Pagett. I don’t want to hear them.”

“Very well, Sir Eustace. But my belief is that I was deliberately
_poisoned!”_

“Ah!” I said. “You’ve been talking to Rayburn.”

He did not deny it.

“At any rate, Sir Eustace, _he_ thinks so—and he should be in a
position to know.”

“By the way, where is the chap?” I asked. “I’ve not set eyes on
him since we came on board.”

“He gives out that he’s ill, and stays in his cabin, Sir Eustace.”
Pagett’s voice dropped again. “But that’s _camouflage,_ I’m sure.
So that he can watch better.”

“Watch?”

“Over your safety, Sir Eustace. In case an attack should be made
upon you.”

“You’re such a cheerful fellow, Pagett,” I said. “I trust that your
imagination runs away with you. If I were you I should go to the
dance as a death’s head or an executioner. It will suit your
mournful style of beauty.”

That shut him up for the time being. I went on deck. The Beddingfeld
girl was deep in conversation with the missionary parson,
Chichester. Women always flutter round parsons.

A man of my figure hates stooping, but I had the courtesy to pick
up a bit of paper that was fluttering round the parson’s feet.

I got no word of thanks for my pains. As a matter of fact, I
couldn’t help seeing what was written on the sheet of paper. There
was just one sentence:

“Don’t try to play a lone hand or it will be the worse for you.”

That’s a nice thing for a parson to have. Who is this fellow
Chichester, I wonder? He _looks_ mild as milk. But looks are
deceptive. I shall ask Pagett about him. Pagett always knows
everything.

I sank gracefully into my deck-chair by the side of Mrs. Blair,
thereby interrupting her _tête-à-tête_ with Race, and remarked that
I didn’t know what the clergy were coming to nowadays.

Then I asked her to dine with me on the night of the Fancy Dress
dance. Somehow or other Race managed to get included in the
invitation.

After lunch the Beddingfeld girl came and sat with us for coffee.
I was right about her legs. They _are_ the best on the ship. I
shall certainly ask her to dinner as well.

I would very much like to know what mischief Pagett was up to in
Florence. Whenever Italy is mentioned, he goes to pieces. If I did
not know how intensely respectable he is—I should suspect him of
some disreputable _amour_ . . .

I wonder now! Even the most respectable men——It would cheer me up
enormously if it was so.

Pagett—with a guilty secret! Splendid!




  CHAPTER XIII


It has been a curious evening.

The only costume that fitted me in the barber’s emporium was that
of a Teddy Bear. I don’t mind playing bears with some nice young
girls on a winter’s evening in England—but it’s hardly an ideal
costume for the equator. However, I created a good deal of
merriment, and won first prize for “brought on board”—an absurd
term for a costume hired for the evening. Still as nobody seemed
to have the least idea whether they were made or brought, it didn’t
matter.

Mrs. Blair refused to dress up. Apparently she is at one with
Pagett on the matter. Colonel Race followed her example. Anne
Beddingfeld had concocted a gipsy costume for herself, and looked
extraordinarily well. Pagett said he had a headache and didn’t
appear. To replace him I asked a quaint little fellow called
Reeves. He’s a prominent member of the South African Labour party.
Horrible little man, but I want to keep in with him, as he gives
me information that I need. I want to understand this Rand business
from both sides.

Dancing was a hot affair. I danced twice with Anne Beddingfeld and
she had to pretend she liked it. I danced once with Mrs. Blair,
who didn’t trouble to pretend, and I victimized various other
damsels whose appearance struck me favourably.

Then we went down to supper. I had ordered champagne; the steward
suggested Clicquot 1911 as being the best they had on the boat and
I fell in with his suggestion. I seemed to have hit on the one
thing that would loosen Colonel Race’s tongue. Far from being
taciturn, the man became actually talkative. For a while this
amused me, then it occurred to me that Colonel Race, and not
myself, was becoming the life and soul of the party. He chaffed me
at length about keeping a diary.

“It will reveal all your indiscretions one of these days, Pedler.”

“My dear Race,” I said, “I venture to suggest that I am not quite
the fool you think me. I may commit indiscretions, but I don’t
write them down in black and white. After my death, my executors
will know my opinion of a great many people, but I doubt if they
will find anything to add or detract from their opinion of _me._
A diary is useful for recording the idiosyncrasies of other
people—but not one’s own.”

“There is such a thing as unconscious self-revelation, though.”

“In the eyes of the psycho-analyst, all things are vile,” I replied
sententiously.

“You must have had a very interesting life, Colonel Race?” said
Miss Beddingfeld, gazing at him with wide, starry eyes.

That’s how they do it, these girls! Othello charmed Desdemona by
telling her stories, but, oh, didn’t Desdemona charm Othello by
the way she listened?

Anyway, the girl set Race off all right. He began to tell lion
stories. A man who has shot lions in large quantities has an unfair
advantage over other men. It seemed to me that it was time I, too,
told a lion story. One of a more sprightly character.

“By the way,” I remarked, “that reminds me of a rather exciting
tale I heard. A friend of mine was out on a shooting trip somewhere
in East Africa. One night he came out of his tent for some reason,
and was startled by a low growl. He turned sharply and saw a lion
crouching to spring. He had left his rifle in the tent. Quick as
thought, he ducked, and the lion sprang right over his head.
Annoyed at having missed him, the animal growled and prepared to
spring again. Again he ducked, and again the lion sprang right over
him. This happened a third time, but by now he was close to the
entrance of the tent, and he darted in and seized his rifle. When
he emerged, rifle in hand, the lion had disappeared. That puzzled
him greatly. He crept round the back of the tent, where there was
a little clearing. There, sure enough, was the lion, busily
practising low jumps.”

This was received with a roar of applause. I drank some champagne.

“On another occasion,” I remarked, “this friend of mine had a
second curious experience. He was trekking across country, and
being anxious to arrive at his destination before the heat of the
day he ordered his boys to inspan whilst it was still dark. They
had some trouble in doing so, as the mules were very restive, but
at last they managed it, and a start was made. The mules raced
along like the wind, and when daylight came they saw why. In the
darkness, the boys had inspanned a lion as the near wheeler.”

This, too, was well received, a ripple of merriment going round
the table, but I am not sure that the greatest tribute did not come
from my friend, the Labour Member, who remained pale and serious.

“My God!” he said anxiously. “Who un’arnessed them?”

“I must go to Rhodesia,” said Mrs. Blair. “After what you have told
us, Colonel Race, I simply must. It’s a horrible journey though,
five days in the train.”

“You must join me on my private car,” I said gallantly. “Oh, Sir
Eustace, how sweet of you, do you really mean it?”

“Do I mean it!” I exclaimed reproachfully, and drank another glass
of champagne.

“Just about another week, and we shall be in South Africa,” sighed
Mrs. Blair.

“Ah, South Africa,” I said sentimentally, and began to quote from
a recent speech of mine at the Colonial Institute. “What has South
Africa to show the world? What indeed? Her fruit and her farms,
her wool and her wattles, her herds and her hides, her gold and
her diamonds——”

I was hurrying on, because I knew that as soon as I paused Reeves
would butt in and inform me that the hides were worthless because
the animals hung themselves up on barbed wire or something of that
sort, would crab everything else, and end up with the hardships of
the miners on the Rand. And I was not in the mood to be abused as
a Capitalist. However, the interruption came from another source
at the magic word diamonds.

“Diamonds!” said Mrs. Blair ecstatically.

“Diamonds!” breathed Miss Beddingfeld.

They both addressed Colonel Race.

“I suppose you’ve been to Kimberley?”

I had been to Kimberley too, but I didn’t manage to say so in time.
Race was being inundated with questions. What were mines like? Was
it true that the natives were kept shut up in compounds? And so
on.

Race answered their questions and showed a good knowledge of his
subject. He described the methods of housing the natives, the
searches instituted, and the various precautions that De Beers
took.

“Then it’s practically impossible to steal any diamonds?” asked
Mrs. Blair with as keen an air of disappointment as though she had
been journeying there for the express purpose.

“Nothing’s impossible, Mrs. Blair. Thefts do occur—like the case
I told you of where the Kafir hid the stone in his wound.”

“Yes, but on a large scale?”

“Once, in recent years. Just before the War in fact. You must
remember the case, Pedler. You were in South Africa at the time?”

I nodded.

“Tell us,” cried Miss Beddingfeld. “Oh, do tell us!”

Race smiled.

“Very well, you shall have the story. I suppose most of you have
heard of Sir Laurence Eardsley, the great South African mining
magnate? His mines were gold mines, but he comes into the story
through his son. You may remember that just before the War rumours
were afield of a new potential Kimberley hidden somewhere in the
rocky floor of the British Guiana jungles. Two young explorers, so
it was reported, had returned from that part of South America
bringing with them a remarkable collection of rough diamonds, some
of them of considerable size. Diamonds of small size had been found
before in the neighbourhood of the Essequibo and Mazaruni rivers,
but these two young men, John Eardsley and his friend Lucas,
claimed to have discovered beds of great carbon deposits at the
common head of two streams. The diamonds were of every colour,
pink, blue, yellow, green, black, and the purest white. Eardsley
and Lucas came to Kimberley where they were to submit their gems
to inspection. At the same time a sensational robbery was found to
have taken place at De Beers. When sending diamonds to England they
are made up into a packet. This remains in the big safe, of which
the two keys are held by two different men whilst a third man knows
the combination. They are handed to the Bank, and the Bank send
them to England. Each package is worth, roughly, about £100,000.

“On this occasion, the Bank were struck by something a little
unusual about the sealing of the packet. It was opened, and found
to contain knobs of sugar!

“Exactly how suspicion came to fasten on John Eardsley I do not
know. It was remembered that he had been very wild at Cambridge
and that his father had paid his debts more than once. Anyhow, it
soon got about that this story of South American diamond fields
was all a fantasy. John Eardsley was arrested. In his possession
was found a portion of the De Beer diamonds.

“But the case never came to court. Sir Laurence Eardsley paid over
a sum equal to the missing diamonds and De Beers did not prosecute.
Exactly how the robbery was committed has never been known. But
the knowledge that his son was a thief broke the old man’s heart.
He had a stroke shortly afterwards. As for John, his Fate was in
a way merciful. He enlisted, went to the War, fought there bravely,
and was killed, thus wiping out the stain on his name. Sir Laurence
himself had a third stroke and died about a month ago. He died
intestate and his vast fortune passed to his next of kin, a man
whom he hardly knew.”

The Colonel paused. A babel of ejaculations and questions broke
out. Something seemed to attract Miss Beddingfeld’s attention, and
she turned in her chair. At the little gasp she gave, I, too,
turned.

My new secretary, Rayburn, was standing in the doorway. Under his
tan, his face had the pallor of one who has seen a ghost. Evidently
Race’s story had moved him profoundly.

Suddenly conscious of our scrutiny, he turned abruptly and
disappeared.

“Do you know who that is?” asked Anne Beddingfeld abruptly.

“That’s my other secretary,” I explained. “Mr. Rayburn. He’s been
seedy up to now.”

She toyed with the bread by her plate.

“Has he been your secretary long?”

“Not very long,” I said cautiously.

But caution is useless with a woman, the more you hold back, the
more she presses forward. Anne Beddingfeld made no bones about it.

“How long?” she asked bluntly.

“Well—er—I engaged him just before I sailed. Old friend of mine
recommended him.”

She said nothing more, but relapsed into a thoughtful silence. I
turned to Race with the feeling that it was my turn to display an
interest in his story.

“Who is Sir Laurence’s next of kin, Race? Do you know?”

“I should say so,” he replied, with a smile. “I am!”




  CHAPTER XIV


_(Anne’s Narrative Resumed)_


It was on the night of the Fancy Dress dance that I decided that
the time had come for me to confide in some one. So far I had
played a lone hand and rather enjoyed it. Now suddenly everything
was changed. I distrusted my own judgment and for the first time
a feeling of loneliness and desolation crept over me.

I sat on the edge of my bunk, still in my gipsy dress, and
considered the situation. I thought first of Colonel Race. He had
seemed to like me. He would be kind, I was sure. And he was no
fool. Yet, as I thought it over, I wavered. He was a man of
commanding personality. He would take the whole matter out of my
hands. And it was _my_ mystery! There were other reasons, too,
which I would hardly acknowledge to myself, but which made it
inadvisable to confide in Colonel Race.

Then I thought of Mrs. Blair. She, too, had been kind to me. I did
not delude myself into the belief that that really meant anything.
It was probably a mere whim of the moment. All the same, I had it
in my power to interest her. She was a woman who had experienced
most of the ordinary sensations of life. I proposed to supply her
with an extraordinary one! And I liked her; liked her ease of
manner, her lack of sentimentality, her freedom from any form of
affectation.

My mind was made up. I decided to seek her out then and there. She
would hardly be in bed yet.

Then I remembered that I did not know the number of her cabin. My
friend, the night stewardess, would probably know. I rang the bell.
After some delay it was answered by a man. He gave me the
information I wanted. Mrs. Blair’s cabin was No. 71. He apologized
for the delay in answering the bell, but explained that he had all
the cabins to attend to.

“Where is the stewardess, then?” I asked.

“They all go off duty at ten o’clock.”

“No—I mean the night stewardess.”

“No stewardess on at night, miss.”

“But—but a stewardess came the other night—about one o’clock.”

“You must have been dreaming, miss. There’s no stewardess on duty
after ten.”

He withdrew and I was left to digest this morsel of information.
Who was the woman who had come to my cabin on the night of the
22nd? My face grew graver as I realized the cunning and audacity
of my unknown antagonists. Then, pulling myself together, I left
my own cabin and sought that of Mrs. Blair. I knocked at the door.

“Who’s that?” called her voice from within.

“It’s me—Anne Beddingfeld.”

“Oh, come in, Gipsy girl.”

I entered. A good deal of scattered clothing lay about, and Mrs.
Blair herself was draped in one of the loveliest kimonos I had ever
seen. It was all orange and gold and black and made my mouth water
to look at it.

“Mrs. Blair,” I said abruptly, “I want to tell you the story of my
life—that is, if it isn’t too late, and you won’t be bored.”

“Not a bit. I always hate going to bed,” said Mrs. Blair, her face
crinkling into smiles in the delightful way it had. “And I should
love to hear the story of your life. You’re a most unusual creature,
Gipsy girl. Nobody else would think of bursting in on me at 1 a.m.
to tell me the story of their life. Especially after snubbing my
natural curiosity for weeks as you have done! I’m not accustomed
to being snubbed. It’s been quite a pleasing novelty. Sit down on
the sofa and unburden your soul.”

I told her the whole story. It took some time as I was conscientious
over all the details. She gave a deep sigh when I had finished,
but she did not say at all what I had expected her to say. Instead
she looked at me, laughed a little and said:

“Do you know, Anne, you’re a very unusual girl? Haven’t you ever
had qualms?”

“Qualms?” I asked, puzzled.

“Yes, qualms, qualms, qualms! Starting off alone with practically
no money. What will you do when you find yourself in a strange
country with all your money gone?”

“It’s no good bothering about that until it comes. I’ve got plenty
of money still. The twenty-five pounds that Mrs. Flemming gave me
is practically intact, and then I won the sweep yesterday. That’s
another fifteen pounds. Why, I’ve got _lots_ of money. Forty
pounds!”

“Lots of money! My God!” murmured Mrs. Blair. _“I_ couldn’t do it,
Anne, and I’ve plenty of pluck in my own way. I couldn’t start off
gaily with a few pounds in my pocket and no idea as to what I was
doing and where I was going.”

“But that’s the fun of it,” I cried, thoroughly roused. “It gives
one such a splendid feeling of adventure.”

She looked at me, nodded once or twice, and then smiled.

“Lucky Anne! There aren’t many people in the world who feel as you
do.”

“Well,” I said impatiently, “what do you think of it all, Mrs.
Blair?”

“I think it’s the most thrilling thing I ever heard! Now, to begin
with, you will stop calling me Mrs. Blair. Suzanne will be ever so
much better. Is that agreed?”

“I should love it, Suzanne.”

“Good girl. Now let’s get down to business. You say that in Sir
Eustace’s secretary—not that long-faced Pagett, the other one—you
recognized the man who was stabbed and came into your cabin for
shelter?”

I nodded.

“That gives us two links connecting Sir Eustace with the tangle.
The woman was murdered in _his_ house, and it’s _his_ secretary
who gets stabbed at the mystic hour of one o’clock. I don’t suspect
Sir Eustace himself, but it can’t be all coincidence. There’s a
connection somewhere even if he himself is unaware of it.”

“Then there’s the queer business of the stewardess,” she continued
thoughtfully. “What was she like?”

“I hardly noticed her. I was so excited and strung up—and a
stewardess seemed such an anticlimax. But—yes—I did think her face
was familiar. Of course it would be if I’d seen her about the
ship.”

“Her face seemed familiar to you,” said Suzanne. “Sure she wasn’t
a man?”

“She was very tall,” I admitted.

“Hum. Hardly Sir Eustace, I should think, nor Mr. Pagett——Wait!”

She caught up a scrap of paper and began drawing feverishly. She
inspected the result with her head poised on one side.

“A very good likeness of the Rev. Edward Chichester. Now for the
etceteras.” She passed the paper over to me. “Is that your
stewardess?”

“Why, yes,” I cried. “Suzanne, how clever of you!”

She disdained the compliment with a light gesture.

“I’ve always had suspicions of that Chichester creature. Do you
remember how he dropped his coffee-cup and turned a sickly green
when we were discussing Crippen the other day?”

“And he tried to get Cabin 17!”

“Yes, it all fits in so far. But what does it all _mean?_ What was
really meant to happen at one o’clock in Cabin 17? It can’t be the
stabbing of the secretary. There would be no point in timing that
for a special hour on a special day in a special place. No, it must
have been some kind of appointment and he was on his way to keep
it when they knifed him. But who was the appointment with? Certainly
not with you. It might have been with Chichester. Or it might have
been with Pagett.”

“That seems unlikely,” I objected, “they can see each other any
time.”

We both sat silent for a minute or two, then Suzanne started off
on another tack.

“Could there have been anything hidden in the cabin?”

“That seems more probable,” I agreed. “It would explain my things
being ransacked the next morning. But there was nothing hidden
there, I’m sure of it.”

“The young man couldn’t have slipped something into a drawer the
night before?”

I shook my head.

“I should have seen him.”

“Could it have been your precious piece of paper they were looking
for?”

“It might have been, but it seems rather senseless. It was only a
time and a date—and they were both past by then.”

Suzanne nodded.

“That’s so of course. No, it wasn’t the paper. By the way, have
you got it with you? I’d rather like to see it.”

I had brought the paper with me as Exhibit A, and I handed it over
to her. She scrutinized it, frowning.

“There’s a dot after the 17. Why isn’t there a dot after the 1
too?”

“There’s a space,” I pointed out.

“Yes, there’s a space, but——”

Suddenly she rose and peered at the paper, holding it as close
under the light as possible. There was a repressed excitement in
her manner.

“Anne, that isn’t a dot! That’s a flaw in the paper! A flaw in the
paper, you see? So you’ve got to ignore it, and just go by the
spaces—the spaces!”

I had risen and was standing by her. I read out the figures as I
now saw them.

“1 71 22.”

“You see,” said Suzanne, “it’s the same, but not quite. It’s one
o’clock still, and the 22nd—but it’s Cabin 71! _My_ cabin, Anne!”

We stood staring at each other, so pleased with our new discovery
and so rapt with excitement that you might have thought we had
solved the whole mystery. Then I fell to earth with a bump.

“But, Suzanne, nothing happened here at one o’clock on the 22nd?”

Her face fell also. “No—it didn’t.”

Another idea struck me.

“This isn’t your own cabin, is it, Suzanne? I mean not the one you
originally booked?”

“No, the purser changed me into it.”

“I wonder if it was booked before sailing for some one—some one
who didn’t turn up. I suppose we could find out.”

“We don’t need to find out, Gipsy girl,” cried Suzanne. “I know!
The purser was telling me about it. The cabin was booked in the
name of Mrs. Grey—but it seems that Mrs. Grey was merely a pseudonym
for the famous Madame Nadina. She’s a celebrated Russian dancer,
you know. She’s never appeared in London, but Paris has been quite
mad about her. She had a terrific success there all through the
War. A thoroughly bad lot, I believe, but most attractive. The
purser expressed his regrets that she wasn’t on board in a most
heart-felt fashion when he gave me her cabin, and then Colonel Race
told me a lot about her. It seems there were very queer stories
afloat in Paris. She was suspected of espionage, but they couldn’t
prove anything. I rather fancy Colonel Race was over there simply
on that account. He’s told me some very interesting things. There
was a regular organized gang, not German in origin at all. In fact
the head of it, a man always referred to as ‘the Colonel’ was
thought to be an Englishman, but they never got any clue as to his
identity. But there is no doubt that he controlled a considerable
organization of international crooks. Robberies, espionages,
assaults, he undertook them all—and usually provided an innocent
scapegoat to pay the penalty. Diabolically clever, he must have
been! This woman was supposed to be one of his agents, but they
couldn’t get hold of anything to go upon. Yes, Anne, we’re on the
right tack. Nadina is just the woman to be mixed up in this
business. The appointment on the morning of the 22nd was with her
in this cabin. But where is she? Why didn’t she sail?”

A light flashed upon me.

“She meant to sail,” I said slowly.

“Then why didn’t she?”

_“Because she was dead._ Suzanne, Nadina was the woman murdered at
Marlow!”

My mind went back to the bare room in the empty house, and there
swept over me again that indefinable sensation of menace and evil.
With it came the memory of the falling pencil and the discovery of
the roll of films. A roll of films—that struck a more recent note.
Where had I heard of a roll of films? And why did I connect that
thought with Mrs. Blair?

Suddenly I flew at her and almost shook her in my excitement.

“Your films! The ones that were passed to you through the
ventilator? Wasn’t that on the 22nd?”

“The ones I lost?”

“How do you know they were the same? Why would any one return them
to you that way—in the middle of the night? It’s a mad idea.
No—they were a message, the films had been taken out of the yellow
tin case, and something else put inside. Have you got it still?”

“I may have used it. No, here it is. I remember I tossed it into
the rack at the side of the bunk.”

She held it out to me.

It was an ordinary round tin cylinder, such as films are packed in
for the tropics. I took it with trembling hand, but even as I did
so my heart leapt. It was noticeably heavier than it should have
been.

With shaking fingers I peeled off the strip of adhesive plaster
that kept it air-tight. I pulled off the lid, and a stream of dull
glassy pebbles rolled onto the bed.

“Pebbles,” I said, keenly disappointed.

“Pebbles?” cried Suzanne.

The ring in her voice excited me.

“Pebbles? No, Anne, not pebbles! _Diamonds!_”




  CHAPTER XV


Diamonds!

I stared, fascinated, at the glassy heap on the bunk. I picked up
one which, but for the weight, might have been a fragment of broken
bottle.

“Are you sure, Suzanne?”

“Oh, yes, my dear. I’ve seen rough diamonds too often to have any
doubts. They’re beauties too, Anne—and some of them are unique, I
should say. There’s a history behind these.”

“The history we heard to-night,” I cried.

“You mean——?”

“Colonel Race’s story. It can’t be a coincidence. He told it for
a purpose.”

“To see its effect, you mean?”

I nodded.

“Its effect on Sir Eustace?”

“Yes.”

But, even as I said it, a doubt assailed me. _Was_ it Sir Eustace
who had been subjected to a test, or had the story been told for
_my_ benefit? I remembered the impression I had received on that
former night of having been deliberately “pumped.” For some reason
or other, Colonel Race was suspicious. But where did he come in?
What possible connection could he have with the affair?

“Who _is_ Colonel Race?” I asked.

“That’s rather a question,” said Suzanne. “He’s pretty well known
as a big-game hunter, and, as you heard him say to-night, he was
a distant cousin of Sir Laurence Eardsley. I’ve never actually met
him until this trip. He journeys to and from Africa a good deal.
There’s a general idea that he does Secret Service work. I don’t
know whether it’s true or not. He’s certainly rather a mysterious
creature.”

“I suppose he came into a lot of money as Sir Laurence Eardsley’s
heir?”

“My dear Anne, he must be _rolling._ You know, he’d be a splendid
match for you.”

“I can’t have a good go at him with you aboard the ship,” I said,
laughing. “Oh, these married women!”

“We do have a pull,” murmured Suzanne complacently. “And everybody
knows that I am absolutely devoted to Clarence—my husband, you
know. It’s so safe and pleasant to make love to a devoted wife.”

“It must be very nice for Clarence to be married to some one like
you.”

“Well, I’m wearing to live with! Still, he can always escape to
the Foreign Office, where he fixes his eyeglass in his eye, and
goes to sleep in a big arm-chair. We might cable him to tell us
all he knows about Race. I love sending cables. And they annoy
Clarence so. He always says a letter would have done as well. I
don’t suppose he’d tell us anything, though. He is so frightfully
discreet. That’s what makes him so hard to live with for long on
end. But let us go on with our matchmaking. I’m sure Colonel Race
is very attracted to you, Anne. Give him a couple of glances from
those wicked eyes of yours, and the deed is done. Every one gets
engaged on board ship. There’s nothing else to do.”

“I don’t want to get married.”

“Don’t you?” said Suzanne. “Why not? I love being married—even to
Clarence!”

I disdained her flippancy.

“What I want to know is,” I said with determination, “what has
Colonel Race got to do with this? He’s in it somewhere.”

“You don’t think it was mere chance, his telling that story?”

“No, I don’t,” I said decidedly. “He was watching us all narrowly.
You remember, _some_ of the diamonds were recovered, not all.
Perhaps these are the missing ones—or perhaps——”

“Perhaps what?”

I did not answer directly.

“I should like to know,” I said, “what became of the other young
man. Not Eardsley but—what was his name?—Lucas!”

“We’re getting some light on the thing, anyway. It’s the diamonds
all these people are after. It must have been to obtain possession
of the diamonds that ‘The Man in the Brown Suit’ killed Nadina.”

“He didn’t kill her,” I said sharply.

“Of course he killed her. Who else could have done so?”

“I don’t know. But I’m sure he didn’t kill her.”

“He went into that house three minutes after her and came out as
white as a sheet.”

“Because he found her dead.”

“But nobody else went in.”

“Then the murderer was in the house already, or else he got in some
other way. There’s no need for him to pass the lodge, he could have
climbed over the wall.”

Suzanne glanced at me sharply.

“‘The Man in the Brown Suit,’” she mused. “Who was he, I wonder?
Anyway, he was identical with the ‘doctor’ in the Tube. He would
have had time to remove his make-up and follow the woman to Marlow.
She and Carton were to have met there, they both had an order to
view the same house, and if they took such elaborate precautions
to make their meeting appear accidental they must have suspected
they were being followed. All the same, Carton did _not_ know that
his shadower was the ‘Man in the Brown Suit.’ When he recognized
him, the shock was so great that he lost his head completely and
stepped back onto the line. That all seems pretty clear, don’t you
think so, Anne?”

I did not reply.

“Yes, that’s how it was. He took the paper from the dead man, and
in his hurry to get away he dropped it. Then he followed the woman
to Marlow. What did he do when he left there, when he had killed
her—or, according to you, found her dead. Where did he go?”

Still I said nothing.

“I wonder, now,” said Suzanne musingly. “Is it possible that he
induced Sir Eustace Pedler to bring him on board as his secretary?
It would be a unique chance of getting safely out of England, and
dodging the hue and cry. But how did he square Sir Eustace? It
looks as though he had some hold over him.”

“Or over Pagett,” I suggested in spite of myself.

“You don’t seem to like Pagett, Anne. Sir Eustace says he’s a most
capable and hard-working young man. And, really, he may be for all
we know against him. Well, to continue my surmises. Rayburn is the
‘Man in the Brown Suit.’ He had read the paper he dropped.
Therefore, misled by the dot as you were, he attempts to reach
Cabin 17 at one o’clock on the 22nd, having previously tried to
get possession of the cabin through Pagett. On the way there
somebody knifes him——”

“Who?” I interpolated.

“Chichester. Yes, it all fits in. Cable to Lord Nasby that you have
found ‘The Man in the Brown Suit,’ and your fortune’s made, Anne!”

“There are several things you’ve overlooked.”

“What things? Rayburn’s got a scar, I know—but a scar can be faked
easily enough. He’s the right height and build. What’s the
description of a head with which you pulverized them at Scotland
Yard?”

I trembled. Suzanne was a well-educated, well-read woman, but I
prayed that she might not be conversant with technical terms of
anthropology.

“Dolichocephalic,” I said lightly.

Suzanne looked doubtful.

“Was that it?”

“Yes. Long-headed, you know. A head whose width is less than 75
per cent. of its length,” I explained fluently.

There was a pause. I was just beginning to breathe freely when
Suzanne said suddenly:

“What’s the opposite?”

“What do you mean—the opposite?”

“Well, there must be an opposite. What do you call the heads whose
breadth is more than 75 per cent. of their length.”

“Brachycephalic,” I murmured unwillingly.

“That’s it. I thought that was what you said.”

“Did I? It was a slip of the tongue. I meant dolichocephalic,” I
said with all the assurance I could muster.

Suzanne looked at me searchingly.  Then she laughed.

“You lie very well, Gipsy girl. But it will save time and trouble
now if you tell me all about it.”

“There’s nothing to tell,” I said unwillingly.

“Isn’t there?” said Suzanne gently.

“I suppose I shall have to tell you,” I said slowly. “I’m not
ashamed of it. You can’t be ashamed of something that just—happens
to you. That’s what he did. He was detestable—rude and ungrateful—but
that I think I understand. It’s like a dog that’s been chained
up—or badly treated—it’ll bite anybody. That’s what he was
like—bitter and snarling. I don’t know why I care—but I do. I care
horribly. Just seeing him has turned my whole life upside-down. I
love him. I want him. I’ll walk all over Africa barefoot till I
find him, and I’ll make him care for me. I’d die for him. I’d work
for him, slave for him, steal for him, even beg or borrow for him!
There—now you know!”

Suzanne looked at me for a long time.

“You’re very un-English, Gipsy girl,” she said at last. “There’s
not a scrap of the sentimental about you. I’ve never met any one
who was at once so practical and so passionate. I shall never care
for any one like that—mercifully for me—and yet—and yet I envy you,
Gipsy girl. It’s something to be able to care. Most people can’t.
But what a mercy for your little doctor man that you didn’t marry
him. He doesn’t sound at all the sort of individual who would enjoy
keeping high explosive in the house! So there’s to be no cabling
to Lord Nasby?”

I shook my head.

“And yet you believe him to be innocent?”

“I also believe that innocent people can be hanged.”

“Hm! yes. But, Anne dear, you can face facts, face them now. In
spite of all you say, he may have murdered this woman.”

“No,” I said. “He didn’t.”

“That’s sentiment.”

“No, it isn’t. He might have killed her. He may even have followed
her there with that idea in his mind. But he wouldn’t take a bit
of black cord and strangle her with it. If he’d done it, he would
have strangled her with his bare hands.”

Suzanne gave a little shiver. Her eyes narrowed appreciatively.

“Hm! Anne, I am beginning to see why you find this young man of
yours so attractive!”




  CHAPTER XVI


I got an opportunity of tackling Colonel Race on the following
morning. The auction of the sweep had just been concluded, and we
walked up and down the deck together.

“How’s the gipsy this morning? Longing for land and her caravan?”

I shook my head.

“Now that the sea is behaving so nicely, I feel I should like to
stay on it for ever and ever.”

“What enthusiasm!”

“Well, isn’t it lovely this morning?”

We leant together over the rail. It was a glassy calm. The sea
looked as though it had been oiled. There were great patches of
colour on it, blue, pale green, emerald, purple and deep orange,
like a cubist picture. There was an occasional flash of silver that
showed the flying fish. The air was moist and warm, almost sticky.
Its breath was like a perfumed caress.

“That was a very interesting story you told us last night,” I said,
breaking the silence.

“Which one?”

“The one about the diamonds.”

“I believe women are always interested in diamonds.”

“Of course we are. By the way, what became of the other young man?
You said there were two of them.”

“Young Lucas? Well, of course, they couldn’t prosecute one without
the other, so he went scot-free too.”

“And what happened to him—eventually, I mean. Does any one know?”

Colonel Race was looking straight ahead of him out to sea. His face
was as devoid of expression as a mask, but I had an idea that he
did not like my questions. Nevertheless, he replied readily enough:

“He went to the War and acquitted himself bravely. He was reported
Missing and Wounded—believed killed.”

That told me what I wanted to know. I asked no more. But more than
ever I wondered how much Colonel Race knew. The part he was playing
in all this puzzled me.

One other thing I did. That was to interview the night steward.
With a little financial encouragement, I soon got him to talk.

“The lady wasn’t frightened, was she, miss? It seemed a harmless
sort of joke. A bet, or so I understood.”

I got it all out of him, little by little. On the voyage from Cape
Town to England one of the passengers had handed him a roll of
films with instructions that they were to be dropped onto the bunk
in Cabin 71 at 1 a.m. on January 22nd on the outward journey. A
lady would be occupying the cabin, and the affair was described as
a bet. I gathered that the steward had been liberally paid for his
part in the transaction. The lady’s name had not been mentioned.
Of course, as Mrs. Blair went straight into Cabin 71, interviewing
the purser as soon as she got on board, it never occurred to the
steward that she was not the lady in question. The name of the
passenger who had arranged the transaction was Carton, and his
description tallied exactly with that of the man killed on the
Tube.

So one mystery, at all events, was cleared up, and the diamonds
were obviously the key to the whole situation.

Those last days on the _Kilmorden_ seemed to pass very quickly. As
we drew nearer and nearer to Cape Town, I was forced to consider
carefully my future plans. There were so many people I wanted to
keep an eye on. Mr. Chichester, Sir Eustace and his secretary,
and—yes, Colonel Race! What was I to do about it? Naturally it was
Chichester who had first claim on my attention. Indeed, I was on
the point of reluctantly dismissing Sir Eustace and Mr. Pagett from
their position of suspicious characters, when a chance conversation
awakened fresh doubts in my mind.

I had not forgotten Mr. Pagett’s incomprehensible emotion at the
mention of Florence. On the last evening on board we were all
sitting on deck and Sir Eustace addressed a perfectly innocent
question to his secretary. I forget exactly what it was, something
to do with railway delays in Italy, but at once I noticed that Mr.
Pagett was displaying the same uneasiness which had caught my
attention before. When Sir Eustace claimed Mrs. Blair for a dance,
I quickly moved into the chair next to the secretary. I was
determined to get to the bottom of the matter.

“I have always longed to go to Italy,” I said. “And especially to
Florence. Didn’t you enjoy it very much there?”

“Indeed I did, Miss Beddingfeld. If you will excuse me, there is
some correspondence of Sir Eustace’s that——”

I took hold of him firmly by his coat sleeve.

“Oh, you mustn’t run away!” I cried with the skittish accent of an
elderly dowager. “I’m sure Sir Eustace wouldn’t like you to leave
me alone with no one to talk to. You never seem to want to talk
about Florence. Oh, Mr. Pagett, I believe you have a guilty secret!”

I still had my hand on his arm, and I could feel the sudden start
he gave.

“Not at all, Miss Beddingfeld, not at all,” he said earnestly. “I
should be only too delighted to tell you all about it, but there
really are some cables——”

“Oh, Mr. Pagett, what a thin pretence. I shall tell Sir Eustace——”

I got no further. He gave another jump. The man’s nerves seemed in
a shocking state.

“What is it you want to know?”

The resigned martyrdom of his tone made me smile inwardly.

“Oh, everything! The pictures, the olive trees——”

I paused, rather at a loss myself.

“I suppose you speak Italian?” I resumed.

“Not a word, unfortunately. But of course, with hall porters
and—er—guides.”

“Exactly,” I hastened to reply. “And which was your favourite
picture?”

“Oh, er—the Madonna—er—Raphael, you know.”

“Dear old Florence,” I murmured sentimentally. “So picturesque on
the banks of the Arno. A beautiful river. And the Duomo, you
remember the Duomo?”

“Of course, of course.”

“Another beautiful river, is it not?” I hazarded. “Almost more
beautiful than the Arno?”

“Decidedly so, I should say.”

Emboldened by the success of my little trap, I proceeded further.
But there was little room for doubt. Mr. Pagett delivered himself
into my hands with every word he uttered. The man had never been
in Florence in his life.

But, if not in Florence, where had he been? In England? Actually
in England at the time of the Mill House Mystery? I decided on a
bold step.

“The curious thing is,” I said, “that I fancied I had seen you
before somewhere. But I must be mistaken—since you were in Florence
at the time. And yet——”

I studied him frankly. There was a hunted look in his eyes. He
passed his tongue over his dry lips.

“Where—er—where——”

“—did I think I had seen you?” I finished for him. “At Marlow. You
know Marlow? Why, of course, how stupid of me, Sir Eustace has a
house there!”

But with an incoherent muttered excuse, my victim rose and fled.

That night I invaded Suzanne’s cabin, alight with excitement.

“You see, Suzanne,” I urged, as I finished my tale, “he was in
England, in Marlow, at the time of the murder. Are you so sure now
that ‘The Man in the Brown Suit’ is guilty.”

“I’m sure of one thing,” said Suzanne, twinkling unexpectedly.

“What’s that?”

“That ‘The Man in the Brown Suit’ is better looking than poor Mr.
Pagett. No, Anne, don’t get cross. I was only teasing. Sit down
here. Joking apart, I think you’ve made a very important discovery.
Up till now, we’ve considered Pagett as having an alibi. Now we
know he hasn’t.”

“Exactly,” I said. “We must keep an eye on him.”

“As well as everybody else,” she said ruefully. “Well, that’s one
of the things I wanted to talk to you about. That—and finance. No,
don’t stick your nose in the air. I know you are absurdly proud
and independent, but you’ve got to listen to horse sense over this.
We’re partners—I wouldn’t offer you a penny because I liked you,
or because you’re a friendless girl—what I want is a thrill, and
I’m prepared to pay for it. We’re going into this together
regardless of expense. To begin with you’ll come with me to the
Mount Nelson Hotel at my expense, and we’ll plan out our campaign.”

We argued the point. In the end I gave in. But I didn’t like it.
I wanted to do the thing on my own.

“That’s settled,” said Suzanne at last, getting up and stretching
herself with a big yawn. “I’m exhausted with my own eloquence. Now
then, let us discuss our victims. Mr. Chichester is going on to
Durban. Sir Eustace is going to the Mount Nelson Hotel in Cape Town
and then up to Rhodesia. He’s going to have a private car on the
railway, and in a moment of expansion, after his fourth glass of
champagne the other night, he offered me a place in it. I dare say
he didn’t really mean it, but, all the same, he can’t very well
back out if I hold him to it.”

“Good,” I approved. “You keep an eye on Sir Eustace and Pagett,
and I take on Chichester. But what about Colonel Race?”

Suzanne looked at me queerly.

“Anne, you can’t possibly suspect——”

“I do. I suspect everybody. I’m in the mood when one looks round
for the most unlikely person.”

“Colonel Race is going to Rhodesia too,” said Suzanne thoughtfully.
“If we could arrange for Sir Eustace to invite him also——”

“You can manage it. You can manage anything.”

“I love butter,” purred Suzanne.

We parted on the understanding that Suzanne should employ her
talents to the best advantage.

I felt too excited to go to bed immediately. It was my last night
on board. Early to-morrow morning we should be in Table Bay.

I slipped up on deck. The breeze was fresh and cool. The boat was
rolling a little in the choppy sea. The decks were dark and
deserted. It was after midnight.

I leaned over the rail, watching the phosphorescent trail of foam.
Ahead of us lay Africa, we were rushing towards it through the dark
water. I felt alone in a wonderful world. Wrapped in a strange
peace, I stood there, taking no heed of time, lost in a dream.

And suddenly I had a curious intimate premonition of danger. I had
heard nothing, but I swung round instinctively. A shadowy form had
crept up behind me. As I turned, it sprang. One hand gripped my
throat, stifling any cry I might have uttered. I fought desperately,
but I had no chance. I was half choking from the grip on my throat,
but I bit and clung and scratched in the most approved feminine
fashion. The man was handicapped by having to keep me from crying
out. If he had succeeded in reaching me unawares it would have been
easy enough for him to sling me overboard with a sudden heave. The
sharks would have taken care of the rest.

Struggle as I would, I felt myself weakening. My assailant felt it
too. He put out all his strength. And then, running on swift
noiseless feet, another shadow joined in. With one blow of his
fist, he sent my opponent crashing headlong to the deck. Released,
I fell back against the rail, sick and trembling.

My rescuer turned to me with a quick movement.

“You’re hurt!”

There was something savage in his tone—a menace against the person
who had dared to hurt me. Even before he spoke I had recognized
him. It was my man—the man with the scar.

But that one moment in which his attention had been diverted to me
had been enough for the fallen enemy. Quick as a flash he had risen
to his feet and taken to his heels down the deck. With an oath
Rayburn sprang after him.

I always hate being out of things. I joined the chase—a bad third.
Round the deck we went to the starboard side of the ship. There by
the saloon door lay the man in a crumpled heap. Rayburn was bending
over him.

“Did you hit him again?” I called breathlessly.

“There was no need,” he replied grimly. “I found him collapsed by
the door. Or else he couldn’t get it open and is shamming. We’ll
soon see about that. And we’ll see who he is too.”

With a beating heart I drew near. I had realized at once that my
assailant was a bigger man than Chichester. Anyway, Chichester was
a flabby creature who might use a knife at a pinch, but who would
have little strength in his bare hands.

Rayburn struck a match. We both uttered an ejaculation. The man
was Guy Pagett.

Rayburn appeared absolutely stupefied by the discovery.

“Pagett,” he muttered. “My God, Pagett.”

I felt a slight sense of superiority.

“You seem surprised.”

“I am,” he said heavily. “I never suspected——” He wheeled suddenly
round on me. “And you? You’re not? You recognized him, I suppose,
when he attacked you?”

“No, I didn’t. All the same, I’m not so very surprised.” He stared
at me suspiciously.

“Where do you come in, I wonder? And how much do you know?”

I smiled.

“A good deal, Mr.—er—Lucas!”

He caught my arm, the unconscious strength of his grip made me
wince.

“Where did you get that name?” he asked hoarsely.

“Isn’t it yours?” I demanded sweetly. “Or do you prefer to be
called ‘The Man in the Brown Suit’?”

That did stagger him. He released my arm and fell back a pace or
two.

“Are you a girl or a witch?” he breathed.

“I’m a friend.” I advanced a step towards him. “I offered you my
help once—I offer it again. Will you have it?”

The fierceness of his answer took me aback.

“No. I’ll have no truck with you or with any woman. Do your
damnedest.”

As before, my own temper began to rise.

“Perhaps,” I said, “you don’t realize how much in my power you are?
A word from me to the Captain——”

“Say it,” he sneered. Then advancing with a quick step: “And whilst
we’re realizing things, my girl, do you realize that you’re in _my_
power this minute? I could take you by the throat like this.” With
a swift gesture he suited the action to the word. I felt his two
hands clasp my throat and press—ever so little. “Like this—and
squeeze the life out of you! And then—like our unconscious friend
here, but with more success—fling your dead body to the sharks.
What do you say to that?”

I said nothing. I laughed. And yet I knew that the danger was real.
Just at that moment he hated me. But I knew that I loved the
danger, loved the feeling of his hands on my throat. That I would
not have exchanged that moment for any other moment in my life. .
. .

With a short laugh he released me.

“What’s your name?” he asked abruptly.

“Anne Beddingfeld.”

“Does nothing frighten you, Anne Beddingfeld?”

“Oh, yes,” I said, with an assumption of coolness I was far from
feeling. “Wasps, sarcastic women, very young men, cockroaches, and
superior shop assistants.”

He gave the same short laugh as before. Then he stirred the
unconscious form of Pagett with his feet.

“What shall we do with this junk? Throw it overboard?” he asked
carelessly.

“If you like,” I answered with equal calm.

“I admire your whole-hearted, blood-thirsty instincts, Miss
Beddingfeld. But we will leave him to recover at his leisure. He
is not seriously hurt.”

“You shrink from a second murder, I see,” I said sweetly.

“A second murder?”

He looked genuinely puzzled.

“The woman at Marlow,” I reminded him, watching the effect of my
words closely.

An ugly brooding expression settled down on his face. He seemed to
have forgotten my presence.

“I might have killed her,” he said. “Sometimes I believe that I
meant to kill her. . . .”

A wild rush of feeling, hatred of the dead woman, surged through
me. _I_ could have killed her that moment, had she stood before
me. . . . For he must have loved her once—he must—he must—to have
felt like that!

I regained control of myself and spoke in my normal voice:

“We seem to have said all there is to be said—except good night.”

“Good night and good-bye, Miss Beddingfeld.”

“Au revoir, Mr. Lucas.”

Again he flinched at the name. He came nearer.

“Why do you say that—au revoir, I mean?”

“Because I have a fancy that we shall meet again.”

“Not if I can help it!”

Emphatic as his tone was, it did not offend me. On the contrary I
hugged myself with secret satisfaction. I am not quite a fool.

“All the same,” I said gravely, “I think we shall.”

“Why?”

I shook my head, unable to explain the feeling that had actuated
my words.

“I never wish to see you again,” he said suddenly and violently.

It was really a very rude thing to say, but I only laughed softly
and slipped away into the darkness.

I heard him start after me, and then pause, and a word floated down
the deck. I think it was a “witch”!




  CHAPTER XVII


  _(Extract from the diary of Sir Eustace Pedler)_


  Mount Nelson Hotel,

  Cape Town.

It is really the greatest relief to get off the _Kilmorden._

The whole time that I was on board I was conscious of being
surrounded by a network of intrigue. To put the lid on everything,
Guy Pagett must needs engage in a drunken brawl the last night. It
is all very well to explain it away, but that is what it actually
amounts to. What else would you think if a man comes to you with
a lump the size of an egg on the side of his head and an eye
coloured all the tints of the rainbow?

Of course Pagett would insist on trying to be mysterious about the
whole thing. According to him, you would think his black eye was
the direct result of his devotion to my interests. His story was
extraordinarily vague and rambling, and it was a long time before
I could make head or tail of it.

To begin with, it appears he caught sight of a man behaving
suspiciously. Those are Pagett’s words. He has taken them straight
from the pages of a German Spy Story. What he means by a man
behaving suspiciously he doesn’t know himself. I said so to him.

“He was slinking along in a very furtive manner, and it was the
middle of the night, Sir Eustace.”

“Well, what were you doing yourself? Why weren’t you in bed and
asleep like a good Christian?” I demanded irritably.

“I had been coding those cables of yours, Sir Eustace, and typing
the diary up to date.”

Trust Pagett to be always in the right and a martyr over it!

“Well?”

“I just thought I would have a look around before turning in, Sir
Eustace. The man was coming down the passage from your cabin. I
thought at once there was something wrong by the way he looked
about him. He slunk up the stairs by the saloon. I followed him.

“My dear Pagett,” I said, “why shouldn’t the poor chap go on deck
without having his footsteps dogged? Lots of people even sleep on
deck—very uncomfortable, I’ve always thought. The sailors wash you
down with the rest of the deck at five in the morning.” I shuddered
at the idea.

“Anyway,” I continued, “if you went worrying some poor devil who
was suffering from insomnia, I don’t wonder he landed you one.”

Pagett looked patient.

“If you would hear me out, Sir Eustace. I was convinced the man
had been prowling about near your cabin where he had no business
to be. The only two cabins down that passage are yours and Colonel
Race’s.”

“Race,” I said, lighting a cigar carefully, “can look after himself
without your assistance, Pagett.” I added as an afterthought: “So
can I.”

Pagett came nearer and breathed heavily as he always does before
imparting a secret.

“You see, Sir Eustace, I fancied—and now indeed I am sure—it was
Rayburn.”

“Rayburn?”

“Yes, Sir Eustace.”

I shook my head.

“Rayburn has far too much sense to attempt to wake me up in the
middle of the night.”

“Quite so, Sir Eustace. I think it was Colonel Race he went to see.
A secret meeting—for orders!”

“Don’t hiss at me, Pagett,” I said, drawing back a little, “and do
control your breathing. Your idea is absurd. Why should they want
to have a secret meeting in the middle of the night? If they’d
anything to say to each other, they could hob-nob over beef-tea in
a perfectly casual and natural manner.”

I could see that Pagett was not in the least convinced.

_“Something_ was going on last night, Sir Eustace,” he urged, “or
why should Rayburn assault me so brutally.”

“You’re quite sure it was Rayburn?”

Pagett appeared to be perfectly convinced of that. It was the only
part of the story that he wasn’t vague about.

“There’s something very queer about all this,” he said. “To begin
with, where _is_ Rayburn?”

It’s perfectly true that we haven’t seen the fellow since we came
on shore. He did not come up to the hotel with us. I decline to
believe that he is afraid of Pagett, however.

Altogether the whole thing is very annoying. One of my secretaries
has vanished into the blue, and the other looks like a disreputable
prize-fighter. I can’t take him about with me in his present
condition. I shall be the laughing-stock of Cape Town. I have an
appointment later in the day to deliver old Milray’s _billet-doux,_
but I shall not take Pagett with me. Confound the fellow and his
prowling ways.

Altogether I am decidedly out of temper. I had poisonous breakfast
with poisonous people. Dutch waitresses with thick ankles who took
half an hour to bring me a bad bit of fish. And this farce of
getting up at 5 a.m. on arrival at the port to see a blinking
doctor and hold your hands above your head simply makes me tired.

_Later._

A very serious thing has occurred. I went to my appointment with
the Prime Minister, taking Milray’s sealed letter. It didn’t look
as though it had been tampered with, but inside was a blank sheet
of paper!

Now, I suppose, I’m in the devil of a mess. Why I ever let that
bleating old fool Milray embroil me in the matter I can’t think.

Pagett is a famous Job’s comforter. He displays a certain gloomy
satisfaction that maddens me. Also, he has taken advantage of my
perturbation to saddle me with the stationery trunk. Unless he is
careful, the next funeral he attends will be his own.

However, in the end I had to listen to him.

“Supposing, Sir Eustace, that Rayburn had overheard a word or two
of your conversation with Mr. Milray in the street? Remember, you
had no written authority from Mr. Milray. You accepted Rayburn on
his own valuation.”

“You think Rayburn is a crook, then?” I said slowly.

Pagett did. How far his views were influenced by resentment over
his black eye I don’t know. He made out a pretty fair case against
Rayburn. And the appearance of the latter told against him. My idea
was to do nothing in the matter. A man who has permitted himself
to be made a thorough fool of is not anxious to broadcast the fact.

But Pagett, his energy unimpaired by his recent misfortunes, was
all for vigorous measures. He had his way of course. He bustled
out to the police station, sent innumerable cables, and brought a
herd of English and Dutch officials to drink whiskies and sodas at
my expense.

We got Milray’s answer that evening. He knew nothing of my late
secretary! There was only one spot of comfort to be extracted from
the situation.

“At any rate,” I said to Pagett, “you weren’t poisoned. You had
one of your ordinary bilious attacks.”

I saw him wince. It was my only score.

_Later._

Pagett is in his element. His brain positively scintillates with
bright ideas. He will have it now that Rayburn is none other than
the famous “Man in the Brown Suit.” I dare say he is right. He
usually is. But all this is getting unpleasant. The sooner I get
off to Rhodesia the better. I have explained to Pagett that he is
not to accompany me.

“You see, my dear fellow,” I said, “you must remain here on the
spot. You might be required to identify Rayburn any minute. And,
besides, I have my dignity as an English Member of Parliament to
think of. I can’t go about with a secretary who has apparently
recently been indulging in a vulgar street-brawl.”

Pagett winced. He is such a respectable fellow that his appearance
is pain and tribulation to him.

“But what will you do about your correspondence and the notes for
your speeches, Sir Eustace?”

“I shall manage,” I said airily.

“Your private car is to be attached to the eleven-o’clock train
to-morrow, Wednesday, morning,” Pagett continued. “I have made all
arrangements. Is Mrs. Blair taking a maid with her?”

“Mrs. Blair?” I gasped.

“She tells me you offered her a place.”

So I did, now I come to think of it. On the night of the Fancy
Dress ball. I even urged her to come. But I never thought she
would! Delightful as she is, I do not know that I want Mrs. Blair’s
society all the way to Rhodesia and back. Women require such a lot
of attention. And they are confoundedly in the way sometimes.

“Have I asked any one else?” I said nervously. One does these
things in moments of expansion.

“Mrs. Blair seemed to think you had asked Colonel Race as well.”

I groaned.

“I must have been very drunk if I asked Race. Very drunk indeed.
Take my advice, Pagett, and let your black eye be a warning to you,
don’t go on the bust again.”

“As you know, I am a teetotaller, Sir Eustace.”

“Much wiser to take the pledge if you have a weakness that way. I
haven’t asked any one else, have I, Pagett?”

“Not that I know of, Sir Eustace.”

I heaved a sigh of relief.

“There’s Miss Beddingfeld,” I said thoughtfully. “She wants to get
to Rhodesia to dig up bones, I believe. I’ve a good mind to offer
her a temporary job as a secretary. She can typewrite, I know, for
she told me so.”

To my surprise, Pagett opposed the idea vehemently. He does not
like Anne Beddingfeld. Ever since the night of the black eye, he
has displayed uncontrollable emotion whenever she is mentioned.
Pagett is full of mysteries nowadays.

Just to annoy him, I shall ask the girl. As I said before, she has
extremely nice legs.




  CHAPTER XVIII


  _(Anne’s Narrative Resumed)_


I don’t suppose that as long as I live I shall forget my first
sight of Table Mountain. I got up frightfully early and went out
on deck. I went right up to the boat deck, which I believe is a
heinous offence, but I decided to dare something in the cause of
solitude. We were just steaming into Table Bay. There were fleecy
white clouds hovering above Table Mountain, and nestling on the
slopes below, right down to the sea, was the sleeping town, gilded
and bewitched by the morning sunlight.

It made me catch my breath and have that curious hungry pain inside
that seizes one sometimes when one comes across something that’s
extra beautiful. I’m not very good at expressing these things, but
I knew well enough that I had found, if only for a fleeting moment,
the thing that I had been looking for ever since I left Little
Hampsly. Something new, something hitherto undreamed of, something
that satisfied my aching hunger for romance.

Perfectly silently, or so it seemed to me, the _Kilmorden_ glided
nearer and nearer. It was still very like a dream. Like all
dreamers, however, I could not let my dream alone. We poor humans
are so anxious not to miss anything.

“This is South Africa,” I kept saying to myself industriously,
“South Africa, South Africa. You are seeing the world. This is the
world. You are seeing it. Think of it, Anne Beddingfeld, you
pudding-head. You’re seeing the world.”

I had thought that I had the boat deck to myself, but now I observed
another figure leaning over the rail, absorbed as I had been in
the rapidly approaching city. Even before he turned his head I knew
who it was. The scene of last night seemed unreal and melodramatic
in the peaceful morning sunlight. What must he have thought of me?
It made me hot to realize the things that I had said. And I hadn’t
meant them—or had I?

I turned my head resolutely away and stared hard at Table Mountain.
If Rayburn had come up here to be alone, I, at least, need not
disturb him by advertising my presence.

But to my intense surprise I heard a light footfall on the deck
behind me, and then his voice, pleasant and normal:

“Miss Beddingfeld.”

“Yes?”

I turned.

“I want to apologize to you. I behaved like a perfect boor last
night.”

“It—it was a peculiar night,” I said hastily.

It was not a very lucid remark, but it was absolutely the only
thing I could think of.

“Will you forgive me?”

I held out my hand without a word. He took it.

“There’s something else I want to say.” His gravity deepened. “Miss
Beddingfeld, you may not know it, but you are mixed up in a rather
dangerous business.”

“I gathered as much,” I said.

“No, you don’t. You can’t possibly know. I want to warn you. Leave
the whole thing alone. It can’t concern you really. Don’t let your
curiosity lead you to tamper with other people’s business. No,
please don’t get angry again. I’m not speaking of myself. You’ve
no idea of what you might come up against—these men will stop at
nothing. They are absolutely ruthless. Already you’re in danger—look
at last night. They fancy you know something. Your only chance is
to persuade them that they’re mistaken. But be careful, always be
on the look out for danger, and, look here, if at any time you
should fall into their hands, don’t try and be clever—tell the
whole truth, it will be your only chance.”

“You make my flesh creep, Mr. Rayburn,” I said, with some truth.
“Why do you take the trouble to warn me?”

He did not answer for some minutes, then he said in a low voice:

“It may be the last thing I can do for you. Once on shore I shall
be all right—but I may not get on shore.”

“What?” I cried.

“You see, I’m afraid you’re not the only person on board who knows
that I am ‘The Man in the Brown Suit.’”

“If you think that I told——” I said hotly.

He reassured me with a smile.

“I don’t doubt you, Miss Beddingfeld. If I ever said I did, I lied.
No, but there’s one person on board who’s known all along. He’s
only got to speak—and my number’s up. All the same, I’m taking a
sporting chance that he won’t speak.”

“Why?”

“Because he’s a man who likes playing a lone hand. And when the
police have got me I should be of no further use to him. Free, I
might be! Well, an hour will show.”

He laughed rather mockingly, but I saw his face harden. If he had
gambled with Fate, he was a good gambler. He could lose and smile.

“In any case,” he said lightly, “I don’t suppose we shall meet
again.”

“No,” I said slowly. “I suppose not.”

“So—good-bye.”

“Good-bye.”

He gripped my hand hard, just for a minute his curious light eyes
seemed to burn into mine, then he turned abruptly and left me. I
heard his footsteps ringing along the deck. They echoed and
re-echoed. I felt that I should hear them always. Footsteps—going
out of my life.

I can admit frankly that I did not enjoy the next two hours. Not
till I stood on the wharf, having finished with most of the
ridiculous formalities that bureaucracies require, did I breathe
freely once more. No arrest had been made, and I realized that it
was a heavenly day, and that I was extremely hungry. I joined
Suzanne. In any case, I was staying the night with her at the
hotel. The boat did not go on to Port Elizabeth and Durban until
the following morning. We got into a taxi and drove to the Mount
Nelson.

It was all heavenly. The sun, the air, the flowers! When I thought
of Little Hampsly in January, the mud knee-deep, and the
sure-to-be-falling rain, I hugged myself with delight. Suzanne was
not nearly so enthusiastic. She has travelled a great deal of
course. Besides, she is not the type that gets excited before
breakfast. She snubbed me severely when I let out an enthusiastic
yelp at the sight of a giant blue convolvulus.

By the way, I should like to make it clear here and now that this
story will not be a story of South Africa. I guarantee no genuine
local colour—you know the sort of thing—half a dozen words in
italics on every page. I admire it very much, but I can’t do it.
In South Sea Islands, of course, you make an immediate reference
to _bêche-de-mer._ I don’t know what _bêche-de-mer_ is, I never
have known, I probably never shall know. I’ve guessed once or twice
and guessed wrong. In South Africa I know you at once begin to talk
about a _stoep_—I do know what a _stoep_ is—it’s the thing round
a house and you sit on it. In various other parts of the world you
call it a veranda, a piazza, and a ha-ha. Then again, there are
pawpaws. I had often read of pawpaws. I discovered at once what
they were, because I had one plumped down in front of me for
breakfast. I thought at first that it was a melon gone bad. The
Dutch waitress enlightened me, and persuaded me to use lemon juice
and sugar and try again. I was very pleased to meet a pawpaw. I
had always vaguely associated it with a _hula-hula,_ which, I
believe, though I may be wrong, is a kind of straw skirt that
Hawaiian girls dance in. No, I think I am wrong—that is a
_lava-lava._

At any rate, all these things are very cheering after England. I
can’t help thinking that it would brighten our cold Island life if
one could have a breakfast of _bacon-bacon,_ and then go out clad
in a _jumper-jumper_ to pay the books.

Suzanne was a little tamer after breakfast. They had given me a
room next to hers with a lovely view right out over Table Bay. I
looked at the view whilst Suzanne hunted for some special
face-cream. When she had found it and started an immediate
application, she became capable of listening to me.

“Did you see Sir Eustace?” I asked. “He was marching out of the
breakfast room as we went in. He’d had some bad fish or something
and was just telling the head waiter what he thought about it, and
he bounced a peach on the floor to show how hard it was—only it
wasn’t quite as hard as he thought and it squashed.”

Suzanne smiled.

“Sir Eustace doesn’t like getting up early any more than I do. But,
Anne, did you see Mr. Pagett? I ran against him in the passage.
He’s got a black eye. What can he have been doing?”

“Only trying to push me overboard,” I replied nonchalantly.

It was a distinct score for me. Suzanne left her face half anointed
and pressed for details. I gave them to her.

“It all gets more and more mysterious,” she cried. “I thought I
was going to have the soft job sticking to Sir Eustace, and that
you would have all the fun with the Rev. Edward Chichester, but
now I’m not so sure. I hope Pagett won’t push me off the train some
dark night.”

“I think you’re still above suspicion, Suzanne. But, if the worst
happens, I’ll wire to Clarence.”

“That reminds me—give me a cable form. Let me see now, what shall
I say. ‘Implicated in the most thrilling mystery please send me a
thousand pounds at once Suzanne.’”

I took the form from her, and pointed out that she could eliminate
a “the,” an “a,” and possibly, if she didn’t care about being
polite, a “please.” Suzanne, however, appears to be perfectly
reckless in money matters. Instead of attending to my economical
suggestions, she added three words more: “enjoying myself hugely.”

Suzanne was engaged to lunch with friends of hers, who came to the
hotel about eleven o’clock to fetch her. I was left to my own
devices. I went down through the grounds of the hotel, crossed the
tram-lines and followed a cool shady avenue right down till I came
to the main street. I strolled about, seeing the sights, enjoying
the sunlight and the black-faced sellers of flowers and fruits. I
also discovered a place where they had the most delicious ice-cream
sodas. Finally, I bought a sixpenny basket of peaches and retraced
my steps to the hotel.

To my surprise and pleasure I found a note awaiting me. It was from
the curator of the Museum. He had read of my arrival on the
_Kilmorden,_ in which I was described as the daughter of the late
Professor Beddingfeld. He had known my father slightly and had had
a great admiration for him. He went on to say that his wife would
be delighted if I would come out and have tea with them that
afternoon at their Villa at Muizenberg. He gave me instructions
for getting there.

It was pleasant to think that poor Papa was still remembered and
highly thought of. I foresaw that I would have to be personally
escorted round the Museum before I left Cape Town, but I risked
that. To most people it would have been a treat—but one can have
too much of a good thing if one is brought up on it, morning, noon
and night.

I put on my best hat (one of Suzanne’s cast-offs) and my least
crumpled white linen and started off after lunch. I caught a fast
train to Muizenberg and got there in about half an hour. It was a
nice trip. We wound slowly round the base of Table Mountain, and
some of the flowers were lovely. My geography being weak, I had
never fully realized that Cape Town is on a peninsula, consequently
I was rather surprised on getting out of the train to find myself
facing the sea once more. There was some perfectly entrancing
bathing going on. The people had short curved boards and came
floating in on the waves. It was far too early to go to tea. I made
for the bathing pavilion, and when they said would I have a surf
board, I said “Yes, please.” Surfing looks perfectly easy. _It
isn’t._ I say no more. I got very angry and fairly hurled my plank
from me. Nevertheless, I determined to return on the first possible
opportunity and have another go. I would not be beaten. Quite by
mistake I then got a good run on my board, and came out delirious
with happiness. Surfing is like that. You are either vigorously
cursing or else you are idiotically pleased with yourself.

I found the Villa Medgee after some little difficulty. It was right
up on the side of the mountain, isolated from the other cottages
and villas. I rang the bell, and a smiling Kafir boy answered it.

“Mrs. Raffini?” I inquired.

He ushered me in, preceded me down the passage and flung open a
door. Just as I was about to pass in, I hesitated. I felt a sudden
misgiving. I stepped over the threshold and the door swung sharply
to behind me.

A man rose from his seat behind a table and came forward with
outstretched hand.

“So glad we have persuaded you to visit us, Miss Beddingfeld,” he
said.

He was a tall man, obviously a Dutchman, with a flaming orange
beard. He did not look in the least like the curator of a museum.
In fact, I realized in a flash that I had made a fool of myself.

I was in the hands of the enemy.




  CHAPTER XIX


It reminded me forcibly of Episode III in “The Perils of Pamela.”
How often had I not sat in the sixpenny seats, eating a twopenny
bar of milk chocolate, and yearning for similar things to happen
to me. Well, they had happened with a vengeance. And somehow it
was not nearly so amusing as I had imagined. It’s all very well on
the screen—you have the comfortable knowledge that there’s bound
to be an Episode IV. But in real life there was absolutely no
guarantee that Anna the Adventuress might not terminate abruptly
at the end of any Episode.

Yes, I was in a tight place. All the things that Rayburn had said
that morning came back to me with unpleasant distinctness. Tell
the truth, he had said. Well, I could always do that, but was it
going to help me? To begin with, would my story be believed? Would
they consider it likely or possible that I had started off on this
mad escapade simply on the strength of a scrap of paper smelling
of moth balls? It sounded to me a wildly incredible tale. In that
moment of cold sanity I cursed myself for a melodramatic idiot,
and yearned for the peaceful boredom of Little Hampsly.

All this passed through my mind in less time than it takes to tell.
My first instinctive movement was to step backwards and feel for
the handle of the door. My captor merely grinned.

“Here you are and here you stay,” he remarked facetiously.

I did my best to put a bold face upon the matter.

“I was invited to come here by the curator of the Cape Town Museum.
If I have made a mistake——”

“A mistake? Oh, yes, a big mistake!”

He laughed coarsely.

“What right have you to detain me? I shall inform the police——”

“Yap, yap, yap—like a little toy dog.” He laughed.

I sat down on a chair.

“I can only conclude that you are a dangerous lunatic,” I said
coldly.

“Indeed?”

“I should like to point out to you that my friends are perfectly
well aware where I have gone, and that if I have not returned by
this evening, they will come in search of me. You understand?”

“So your friends know where you are, do they? Which of them?”

Thus challenged, I did a lightning calculation of chances. Should
I mention Sir Eustace? He was a well-known man, and his name might
carry weight. But if they were in touch with Pagett, they might
know I was lying. Better not risk Sir Eustace.

“Mrs. Blair, for one,” I said lightly. “A friend of mine with whom
I am staying.”

“I think not,” said my captor, slyly shaking his orange head. “You
have not seen her since eleven this morning. And you received our
note, bidding you come here, at lunch-time.”

His words showed me how closely my movements had been followed,
but I was not going to give in without a fight.

“You are very clever,” I said. “Perhaps you have heard of that
useful invention, the telephone? Mrs. Blair called me up on it when
I was resting in my room after lunch. I told her then where I was
going this afternoon.”

To my great satisfaction, I saw a shade of uneasiness pass over
his face. Clearly he had overlooked the possibility that Suzanne
might have telephoned to me. I wished she really had done so!

“Enough of this,” he said harshly, rising.

“What are you going to do with me?” I asked, still endeavouring to
appear composed.

“Put you where you can do no harm in case your friends come after
you.”

For a moment my blood ran cold, but his next words reassured me.

“To-morrow you’ll have some questions to answer, and after you’ve
answered them we shall know what to do with you. And I can tell
you, young lady, we’ve more ways than one of making obstinate
little fools talk.”

It was not cheering, but it was at least a respite. I had until
to-morrow. This man was clearly an underling obeying the orders of
a superior. Could that superior by any chance be Pagett?

He called and two Kafirs appeared. I was taken upstairs. Despite
my struggles, I was gagged and then bound hand and foot. The room
into which they had taken me was a kind of attic right under the
roof. It was dusty and showed little signs of having been occupied.
The Dutchman made a mock bow and withdrew, closing the door behind
him.

I was quite helpless. Turn and twist as I would, I could not loosen
my hands in the slightest degree, and the gag prevented me from
crying out. If, by any possible chance, any one did come to the
house, I could do nothing to attract their attention. Down below
I heard the sound of a door shutting. Evidently the Dutchman was
going out.

It was maddening not to be able to do anything. I strained again
at my bonds, but the knots held. I desisted at last, and either
fainted or fell asleep. When I awoke I was in pain all over. It
was quite dark now, and I judged that the night must be well
advanced, for the moon was high in the heavens and shining down
through the dusty skylight. The gag was half choking me and the
stiffness and pain were unendurable.

It was then that my eyes fell on a bit of broken glass lying in
the corner. A moonbeam slanted right down on it, and its glistening
had caught my attention. As I looked at it, an idea came into my
head.

My arms and legs were helpless, but surely I could still _roll._
Slowly and awkwardly, I set myself in motion. It was not easy.
Besides being extremely painful, since I could not guard my face
with my arms, it was also exceedingly difficult to keep any
particular direction.

I tended to roll in every direction except the one I wanted to go.
In the end, however, I came right up against my objective. It
almost touched my bound hands.

Even then it was not easy. It took an infinity of time before I
could wriggle the glass into such a position, wedged against the
wall, that it would rub up and down on my bonds. It was a long
heart-rending process, and I almost despaired, but in the end I
succeeded in sawing through the cords that bound my wrists. The
rest was a matter of time. Once I had restored the circulation to
my hands by rubbing the wrists vigorously, I was able to undo the
gag. One or two full breaths did a lot for me.

Very soon I had undone the last knot, though even then it was some
time before I could stand on my feet, but at last I stood erect,
swinging my arms to and fro to restore the circulation, and wishing
above all things that I could get hold of something to eat.

I waited about a quarter of an hour, to be quite sure of my
recovered strength. Then I tiptoed noiselessly to the door. As I
had hoped, it was not locked, only latched. I unlatched it and
peeped cautiously out.

Everything was still. The moonlight came in through a window and
showed me the dusty uncarpeted staircase. Cautiously I crept down
it. Still no sound—but as I stood on the landing below, a faint
murmur of voices reached me. I stopped dead and stood there for
some time. A clock on the wall registered the fact that it was
after midnight.

I was fully aware of the risks I might run if I descended lower,
but my curiosity was too much for me. With infinite precautions I
prepared to explore. I crept softly down the last flight of stairs
and stood in the square hall. I looked round me—and then caught my
breath with a gasp. A Kafir boy was sitting by the hall door. He
had not seen me, indeed I soon realized by his breathing that he
was fast asleep.

Should I retreat, or should I go on? The voices came from the room
I had been shown into on arrival. One of them was that of my Dutch
friend, the other I could not for the moment recognize, though it
seemed vaguely familiar.

In the end I decided that it was clearly my duty to hear all I
could. I must risk the Kafir boy waking up. I crossed the hall
noiselessly and knelt by the study door. For a moment or two I
could hear no better. The voices were louder, but I could not
distinguish what they said.

I applied my eye to the keyhole instead of my ear. As I had guessed,
one of the speakers was the big Dutchman. The other man was sitting
outside my circumscribed range of vision.

Suddenly he rose to get himself a drink. His back, black clad and
decorous, came into view. Even before he turned round I knew who
he was.

Mr. Chichester!

Now I began to make out the words.

“All the same, it is dangerous. Suppose her friends come after
her?”

It was the big man speaking. Chichester answered him. He had
dropped his clerical voice entirely. No wonder I had not recognized
it.

“All bluff. They haven’t an idea where she is.”

“She spoke very positively.”

“I dare say. I’ve looked into the matter, and we’ve nothing to
fear. Anyway, it’s the ‘Colonel’s’ orders. You don’t want to go
against them, I suppose?”

The Dutchman ejaculated something in his own language. I judged it
to be a hasty disclaimer.

“But why not knock her on the head?” he growled. “It would be
simple. The boat is all ready. She could be taken out to sea?”

“Yes,” said Chichester meditatively. “That is what I should do.
She knows too much, that is certain. But the ‘Colonel’ is a man
who likes to play a lone hand—though no one else must do so.”
Something in his own words seemed to awaken a memory that annoyed
him. “He wants information of some kind from this girl.”

He had paused before the information, and the Dutchman was quick
to catch him up.

“Information?”

“Something of the kind.”

“Diamonds,” I said to myself.

“And now,” continued Chichester, “give me the lists.”

For a long time their conversation was quite incomprehensible to
me. It seemed to deal with large quantities of vegetables. Dates
were mentioned, prices, and various names of places which I did
not know. It was quite half an hour before they had finished their
checking and counting.

“Good,” said Chichester, and there was a sound as though he pushed
back his chair. “I will take these with me for the ‘Colonel’ to
see.”

“When do you leave?”

“Ten o’clock to-morrow morning will do.”

“Do you want to see the girl before you go?”

“No. There are strict orders that no one is to see her until the
‘Colonel’ comes. Is she all right?”

“I looked in on her when I came in for dinner. She was asleep, I
think. What about food?”

“A little starvation will do no harm. The ‘Colonel’ will be here
some time to-morrow. She will answer questions better if she is
hungry. No one had better go near her till then. Is she securely
tied up?”

The Dutchman laughed.

“What do you think?”

They both laughed. So did I, under my breath. Then, as the sounds
seemed to betoken that they were about to come out of the room, I
beat a hasty retreat. I was just in time. As I reached the head of
the stairs, I heard the door of the room open, and at the same time
the Kafir stirred and moved. My retreat by the way of the hall door
was not to be thought of. I retired prudently to the attic, gathered
my bonds round me and lay down again on the floor, in case they
should take it into their heads to come and look at me.

They did not do so, however. After about an hour, I crept down the
stairs, but the Kafir by the door was awake and humming softly to
himself. I was anxious to get out of the house, but I did not quite
see how to manage it.

In the end I was forced to retreat to the attic again. The Kafir
was clearly on guard for the night. I remained there patiently all
through the sounds of early morning preparation. The men breakfasted
in the hall, I could hear their voices distinctly floating up the
stairs. I was getting thoroughly unnerved. How on earth was I to
get out of the house?

I counselled myself to be patient. A rash move might spoil
everything. After breakfast came the sounds of Chichester departing.
To my intense relief, the Dutchman accompanied him.

I waited breathlessly. Breakfast was being cleared away, the work
of the house was being done. At last, the various activities seemed
to die down. I slipped out from my lair once more. Very carefully
I crept down the stairs. The hall was empty. Like a flash I was
across it, had unlatched the door, and was outside in the sunshine.
I ran down the drive like one possessed.

Once outside, I resumed a normal walk. People stared at me
curiously, and I do not wonder. My face and clothes must have been
covered in dust from rolling about in the attic. At last I came to
a garage. I went in.

“I have met with an accident,” I explained. “I want a car to take
me to Cape Town at once. I must catch the boat to Durban.”

I had not long to wait. Ten minutes later I was speeding along in
the direction of Cape Town. I must know if Chichester was on the
boat. Whether to sail on her myself or not, I could not determine,
but in the end I decided to do so. Chichester would not know that
I had seen him in the Villa at Muizenberg. He would doubtless lay
further traps for me, but I was forewarned. And he was the man I
was after, the man who was seeking the diamonds on behalf of the
mysterious “Colonel.”

Alas, for my plans! As I arrived at the docks, the _Kilmorden
Castle_ was steaming out to sea. And I had no means of knowing
whether Chichester had sailed on her or not!




  CHAPTER XX


I drove to the hotel. There was no one in the lounge that I knew.
I ran upstairs and tapped on Suzanne’s door. Her voice bade me
“come in.” When she saw who it was she literally fell on my neck.

“Anne, dear, where have you been? I’ve been worried to death about
you. What have you been doing?”

“Having adventures,” I replied. “Episode III of ‘The Perils of
Pamela.’”

I told her the whole story. She gave vent to a deep sigh when I
finished.

“Why do these things always happen to you?” she demanded plaintively.
“Why does no one gag me and bind me hand and foot?”

“You wouldn’t like it if they did,” I assured her. “To tell you
the truth, I’m not nearly so keen on having adventures myself as
I was. A little of that sort of thing goes a long way.”

Suzanne seemed unconvinced. An hour or two of gagging and binding
would have changed her views quickly enough. Suzanne likes thrills,
but she hates being uncomfortable.

“And what are we all doing now?” she asked.

“I don’t quite know,” I said thoughtfully. “You still go to
Rhodesia, of course, to keep an eye on Pagett——”

“And you?”

That was just my difficulty. Had Chichester gone on the _Kilmorden,_
or had he not? Did he mean to carry out his original plan of going
to Durban? The hour of his leaving Muizenberg seemed to point to
an affirmative answer to both questions. In that case, I might go
to Durban by train. I fancied that I should get there before the
boat. On the other hand, if the news of my escape were wired to
Chichester, and also the information that I had left Cape Town for
Durban, nothing was simpler for him than to leave the boat at
either Port Elizabeth or East London and so give me the slip
completely.

It was rather a knotty problem.

“We’ll inquire about trains to Durban anyway,” I said.

“And it’s not too late for morning tea,” said Suzanne. “We’ll have
it in the lounge.”

The Durban train left at 8.15 that evening, so they told me at the
office. For the moment I postponed decision and joined Suzanne for
somewhat belated “eleven-o’clock tea.”

“Do you feel that you would really recognize Chichester again—in
any other disguise, I mean?” asked Suzanne.

I shook my head ruefully.

“I certainly didn’t recognize him as the stewardess, and never
should have but for your drawing.”

“The man’s a professional actor, I’m sure of it,” said Suzanne
thoughtfully. “His make-up is perfectly marvellous. He might come
off the boat as a navvy or something, and you’d never spot him.”

“You’re very cheering,” I said.

At that minute, Colonel Race stepped in through the window and came
and joined us.

“What is Sir Eustace doing?” asked Suzanne. “I haven’t seen him
about to-day.”

Rather an odd expression passed over the Colonel’s face.

“He’s got a little trouble of his own to attend to which is keeping
him busy.”

“Tell us about it.”

“I mustn’t tell tales out of school.”

“Tell us something—even if you have to invent it for our special
benefit.”

“Well, what would you say to the famous ‘Man in the Brown Suit’
having made the voyage with us?”

_“What?”_

I felt the colour die out of my face and then surge back again.
Fortunately Colonel Race was not looking at me.

“It’s a fact, I believe. Every port watched for him and he
bamboozled Pedler into bringing him out as his secretary!”

“Not Mr. Pagett?”

“Oh, not Pagett—the other fellow. Rayburn, he called himself.”

“Have they arrested him?” asked Suzanne. Under the table she gave
my hand a reassuring squeeze. I waited breathlessly for an answer.

“He seems to have disappeared into thin air.”

“How does Sir Eustace take it?”

“Regards it as a personal insult offered him by Fate.”

An opportunity of hearing Sir Eustace’s views on the matter
presented itself later in the day. We were awakened from a
refreshing afternoon nap by a page-boy with a note. In touching
terms it requested the pleasure of our company at tea in his
sitting-room.

The poor man was indeed in a pitiable state. He poured out his
troubles to us, encouraged by Suzanne’s sympathetic murmurs. (She
does that sort of thing very well.)

“First a perfectly strange woman has the impertinence to get
herself murdered in my house—on purpose to annoy me, I do believe.
Why my house? Why, of all the houses in Great Britain, choose the
Mill House? What harm had I ever done the woman that she must needs
get herself murdered there?”

Suzanne made one of her sympathetic noises again and Sir Eustace
proceeded in a still more aggrieved tone.

“And, if that’s not enough, the fellow who murdered her has the
impudence, the colossal impudence, to attach himself to me as my
secretary. My secretary, if you please! I’m tired of secretaries,
I won’t have any more secretaries. Either they’re concealed
murderers or else they’re drunken brawlers. Have you seen Pagett’s
black eye? But of course you have. How can I go about with a
secretary like that? And his face is such a nasty shade of yellow
too—just the colour that doesn’t go with a black eye. I’ve done
with secretaries—unless I have a girl. A nice girl, with liquid
eyes, who’ll hold my hand when I’m feeling cross. What about you,
Miss Anne. Will you take on the job?”

“How often shall I have to hold your hand?” I asked, laughing.

“All day long,” replied Sir Eustace gallantly.

“I shan’t get much typing done at that rate,” I reminded him.

“That doesn’t matter. All this work is Pagett’s idea. He works me
to death. I’m looking forward to leaving him behind in Cape Town.”

“He is staying behind?”

“Yes, he’ll enjoy himself thoroughly sleuthing about after Rayburn.
That’s the sort of thing suits Pagett down to the ground. He adores
intrigue. But I’m quite serious in my offer. Will you come? Mrs.
Blair here is a competent chaperon, and you can have a half-holiday
every now and again to dig for bones.”

“Thank you very much, Sir Eustace,” I said cautiously, “but I think
I’m leaving for Durban to-night.”

“Now don’t be an obstinate girl. Remember, there are lots of lions
in Rhodesia. You’ll like lions. All girls do.”

“Will they be practising low jumps?” I asked, laughing. “No, thank
you very much, but I must go to Durban.”

Sir Eustace looked at me, sighed deeply, then opened the door of
the adjoining room and called to Pagett.

“If you’ve quite finished your afternoon sleep, my dear fellow,
perhaps you’d do a little work for change.”

Guy Pagett appeared in the doorway. He bowed to us both, starting
slightly at the sight of me, and replied in a melancholy voice:

“I have been typing that memorandum all this afternoon, Sir
Eustace.”

“Well, stop typing it then. Go down to the Trade Commissioner’s
Office, or the Board of Agriculture, or the Chamber of Mines, or
one of these places, and ask them to lend me some kind of a woman
to take to Rhodesia. She must have liquid eyes and not object to
my holding her hand.”

“Yes, Sir Eustace. I will ask for a competent short-hand-typist.”

“Pagett’s a malicious fellow,” said Sir Eustace, after the secretary
had departed. “I’d be prepared to bet that he’ll pick out some
slab-faced creature on purpose to annoy me. She must have nice feet
too—I forgot to mention that.”

I clutched Suzanne excitedly by the hand and almost dragged her
along to her room.

“Now, Suzanne,” I said, “we’ve got to make plans—and make them
quickly. Pagett is staying behind here—you heard that?”

“Yes. I suppose that means that I shan’t be allowed to go to
Rhodesia—which is very annoying, because I _want_ to go to Rhodesia.
How tiresome.”

“Cheer up,” I said. “You’re going all right. I don’t see how you
could back out at the last moment without its appearing frightfully
suspicious. And, besides, Pagett might suddenly be summoned by Sir
Eustace, and it would be far harder for you to attach yourself to
him for the journey up.”

“It would hardly be respectable,” said Suzanne, dimpling. “I should
have to pretend a fatal passion for him as an excuse.”

“On the other hand, if you were there when he arrived, it would
all be perfectly simple and natural. Besides, I don’t think we
ought to lose sight of the other two entirely.”

“Oh, Anne, you surely can’t suspect Colonel Race or Sir Eustace?”

“I suspect everybody,” I said darkly, “and if you’ve read any
detective stories, Suzanne, you must know that it’s always the most
unlikely person who’s the villain. Lots of criminals have been
cheerful fat men like Sir Eustace.”

“Colonel Race isn’t particularly fat—or particularly cheerful
either.”

“Sometimes they’re lean and saturnine,” I retorted. “I don’t say
I seriously suspect either of them, but, after all, the woman was
murdered in Sir Eustace’s house——”

“Yes, yes, we needn’t go over all that again. I’ll watch him for
you, Anne, and if he gets any fatter and any more cheerful, I’ll
send you a telegram at once. ‘Sir E. swelling. Highly suspicious.
Come at once.’”

“Really, Suzanne,” I cried, “you seem to think all this is a game!”

“I know I do,” said Suzanne, unabashed. “It seems like that. It’s
your fault, Anne. I’ve got imbued with your ‘Let’s have an
adventure’ spirit. It doesn’t seem a bit real. Dear me, if Clarence
knew that I was running about Africa tracking dangerous criminals,
he’d have a fit.”

“Why don’t you cable him about it?” I asked sarcastically.

Suzanne’s sense of humour always fails her when it comes to sending
cables. She considered my suggestion in perfectly good faith.

“I might. It would have to be a very long one.” Her eyes brightened
at the thought. “But I think it’s better not. Husbands always want
to interfere with perfectly harmless amusements.”

“Well,” I said, summing up the situation, “you will keep an eye on
Sir Eustace and Colonel Race——”

“I know why I’ve got to watch Sir Eustace,” interrupted Suzanne,
“because of his figure and his humorous conversation. But I think
it’s carrying it rather far to suspect Colonel Race, I do indeed.
Why, he’s something to do with the Secret Service. Do you know,
Anne, I believe the best thing we could do would be to confide in
him and tell him the whole story.”

I objected vigorously to this unsporting proposal. I recognized in
it the disastrous effects of matrimony. How often have I not heard
a perfectly intelligent female say, in the tone of one clinching
an argument, _“Edgar_ says——” And all the time you are perfectly
aware that Edgar is a perfect fool. Suzanne, by reason of her
married state, was yearning to lean upon some man or other.

However, she promised faithfully that she would not breathe a word
to Colonel Race, and we went on with our plan-making.

“It’s quite clear that I must stay here and watch Pagett, and this
is the best way to do it. I must pretend to leave for Durban this
evening, take my luggage down and so on, but really I shall go to
some small hotel in the town. I can alter my appearance a
little—wear a fair toupee and one of those thick white lace veils,
and I shall have a much better chance of seeing what he’s really
at if he thinks I’m safely out of the way.”

Suzanne approved this plan heartily. We made due and ostentatious
preparations, inquiring once more about the departure of the train
at the office and packing my luggage.

We dined together in the restaurant. Colonel Race did not appear,
but Sir Eustace and Pagett were at their table in the window.
Pagett left the table half-way through the meal, which annoyed me,
as I had planned to say goodbye to him. However, doubtless Sir
Eustace would do as well. I went over to him when I had finished.

“Good-bye, Sir Eustace,” I said. “I’m off to-night to Durban.”

Sir Eustace sighed heavily.

“So I heard. You wouldn’t like me to come with you, would you?”

“I should love it.”

“Nice girl. Sure you won’t change your mind and come and look for
lions in Rhodesia?”

“Quite sure.”

“He must be a very handsome fellow,” said Sir Eustace plaintively.
“Some young whipper-snapper in Durban, I suppose, who puts my
mature charms completely in the shade. By the way, Pagett’s going
down in the car in a minute or two. He could take you to the
station.”

“Oh, no, thank you,” I said hastily. “Mrs. Blair and I have got
our own taxi ordered.”

To go down with Guy Pagett was the last thing I wanted! Sir Eustace
looked at me attentively.

“I don’t believe you like Pagett. I don’t blame you. Of all the
officious, interfering asses—going about with the air of a martyr,
and doing everything he can to annoy and upset me!”

“What has he done now?” I inquired with some curiosity.

“He’s got hold of a secretary for me. You never saw such a woman!
Forty, if she’s a day, wears pince-nez and sensible boots and an
air of brisk efficiency that will be the death of me. A regular
slab-faced woman.”

“Won’t she hold your hand?”

“I devoutly hope not!” exclaimed Sir Eustace. “That would be the
last straw. Well, good-bye, liquid eyes. If I shoot a lion I shan’t
give you the skin—after the base way you’ve deserted me.”

He squeezed my hand warmly and we parted. Suzanne was waiting for
me in the hall. She was to come down to see me off.

“Let’s start at once,” I said hastily, and motioned to the man to
get a taxi.

Then a voice behind me made me start:

“Excuse me, Miss Beddingfeld, but I’m just going down in a car. I
can drop you and Mrs. Blair at the station.”

“Oh, thank you,” I said hastily. “But there’s no need to trouble
you. I——”

“No trouble at all, I assure you. Put the luggage in, porter.”

I was helpless. I might have protested further, but a slight
warning nudge from Suzanne urged me to be on my guard.

“Thank you, Mr. Pagett,” I said coldly.

We all got into the car. As we raced down the road into the town,
I racked my brains for something to say. In the end Pagett himself
broke the silence.

“I have secured a very capable secretary for Sir Eustace,” he
observed. “Miss Pettigrew.”

“He wasn’t exactly raving about her just now,” I remarked.

Pagett looked at me coldly.

“She is a proficient shorthand-typist,” he said repressively.

We pulled up in front of the station. Here surely he would leave
us. I turned with outstretched hand—but no.

“I’ll come and see you off. It’s just eight o’clock, your train
goes in a quarter of an hour.”

He gave efficient directions to porters. I stood helpless, not
daring to look at Suzanne. The man suspected. He was determined to
make sure that I did go by the train. And what could I do? Nothing.
I saw myself, in a quarter of an hour’s time, steaming out of the
station with Pagett planted on the platform waving me adieu. He
had turned the tables on me adroitly. His manner towards me had
changed, moreover. It was full of an uneasy geniality which sat
ill upon him, and which nauseated me. The man was an oily hypocrite.
First he tried to murder me, and now he paid me compliments! Did
he imagine for one minute that I hadn’t recognized him that night
on the boat? No, it was a pose, a pose which he forced me to
acquiesce in, his tongue in his cheek all the while.

Helpless as a sheep, I moved along under his expert directions. My
luggage was piled in my sleeping compartment—I had a two-berth one
to myself. It was twelve minutes past eight. In three minutes the
train would start.

But Paggett had reckoned without Suzanne.

“It will be a terribly hot journey, Anne,” she said suddenly.
“Especially going through the Karoo to-morrow. You’ve got some
eau-de-Cologne or lavender water with you, haven’t you?”

My cue was plain.

“Oh, dear,” I cried. “I left my eau-de-Cologne on the dressing-table
at the hotel.”

Suzanne’s habit of command served her well. She turned imperiously
to Pagett.

“Mr. Pagett. Quick. You’ve just time. There’s a chemist almost
opposite the station. Anne must have some eau-de-Cologne.”

He hesitated, but Suzanne’s imperative manner was too much for him.
She is a born autocrat. He went. Suzanne followed him with her eyes
till he disappeared.

“Quick, Anne, get out the other side—in case he hasn’t really gone,
but is watching us from the end of the platform. Never mind your
luggage. You can telegraph about that to-morrow. Oh, if only the
train starts on time!”

I opened the gate on the opposite side to the platform and climbed
down. Nobody was observing me. I could just see Suzanne standing
where I had left her, looking up at the train and apparently
chatting to me at the window. A whistle blew, the train began to
draw out. Then I heard feet racing furiously up the platform. I
withdrew to the shadow of a friendly bookstall and watched.

Suzanne turned from waving her handkerchief to the retreating
train.

“Too late, Mr. Pagett,” she said cheerfully. “She’s gone. Is that
the eau-de-Cologne? What a pity we didn’t think of it sooner!”

They passed not far from me on their way out of the station. Guy
Pagett was extremely hot. He had evidently run all the way to the
chemist and back.

“Shall I get you a taxi, Mrs. Blair?”

Suzanne did not fail in her rôle.

“Yes, please. Can’t I give you a lift back? Have you much to do
for Sir Eustace? Dear me, I wish Anne Beddingfeld was coming with
us to-morrow. I don’t like the idea of a young girl like that
travelling off to Durban all by herself. But she was set upon it.
Some little attraction there, I fancy——”

They passed out of ear-shot. Clever Suzanne. She had saved me.

I allowed a minute or two to elapse and then I too made my way out
of the station, almost colliding as I did so with a man—an
unpleasant-looking man with a nose disproportionately big for his
face.




  CHAPTER XXI


I had no further difficulty in carrying out my plans. I found a
small hotel in a back street, got a room there, paid a deposit as
I had no luggage with me, and went placidly to bed.

On the following morning I was up early and went out into the town
to purchase a modest wardrobe. My idea was to do nothing until
after the departure of the eleven-o’clock train to Rhodesia with
most of the party on board. Pagett was not likely to indulge in
any nefarious activities until he had got rid of them. Accordingly
I took a tram out of the town and proceeded to enjoy a country
walk. It was comparatively cool, and I was glad to stretch my legs
after the long voyage and my close confinement at Muizenberg.

A lot hinges on small things. My shoe-lace came untied, and I
stopped to do it up. The road had just turned a corner, and as I
was bending over the offending shoe a man came right round and
almost walked into me. He lifted his hat, murmuring an apology,
and went on. It struck me at the time that his face was vaguely
familiar, but at the moment I thought no more of it. I looked at
my wrist-watch. The time was getting on. I turned my feet in the
direction of Cape Town.

There was a tram on the point of going and I had to run for it. I
heard other footsteps running behind me. I swung myself on and so
did the other runner. I recognized him at once. It was the man who
had passed me on the road when my shoe came untied, and in a flash
I knew why his face was familiar. It was the small man with the
big nose whom I had run into on leaving the station the night
before.

The coincidence was rather startling. Could it be possible that
the man was deliberately following me? I resolved to test that as
promptly as possible. I rang the bell and got off at the next stop.
The man did not get off. I withdrew into the shadow of a shop
doorway and watched. He alighted at the next stop and walked back
in my direction.

The case was clear enough. I was being followed. I had crowed too
soon. My victory over Guy Pagett took on another aspect. I hailed
the next tram and, as I expected, my shadower also got on. I gave
myself up to some very serious thinking.

It was perfectly apparent that I had stumbled on a bigger thing
than I knew. The murder in the house at Marlow was not an isolated
incident committed by a solitary individual. I was up against a
gang, and, thanks to Colonel Race’s revelations to Suzanne, and
what I had overheard at the house at Muizenberg, I was beginning
to understand some of its manifold activities. Systematized crime,
organized by the man known to his followers as the “Colonel”! I
remembered some of the talk I had heard on board ship, of the
strike on the Rand and the causes underlying it—and the belief that
some secret organization was at work fomenting the agitation. That
was the “Colonel’s” work, his emissaries were acting according to
plan. He took no part in these things himself, I had always heard,
as he limited himself to directing and organizing. The brain-work—not
the dangerous labour—for him. But still it well might be that he
himself was on the spot, directing affairs from an apparently
impeccable position.

That, then, was the meaning of Colonel Race’s presence on the
_Kilmorden Castle._ He was out after the arch-criminal. Everything
fitted in with that assumption. He was some one high up in the
Secret Service whose business it was to lay the “Colonel” by the
heels.

I nodded to myself—things were becoming very clear to me. What of
my part in the affair? Where did I come in? Was it only diamonds
they were after? I shook my head. Great as the value of the diamonds
might be, they hardly accounted for the desperate attempts which
had been made to get me out of the way. No, I stood for more than
that. In some way, unknown to myself, I was a menace, a danger!
Some knowledge that I had, or that they thought I had, made them
anxious to remove me at all costs—and that knowledge was bound up
somehow with the diamonds. There was one person, I felt sure, who
could enlighten me—if he would! The Man in the Brown Suit—Harry
Rayburn. He knew the other half of the story. But he had vanished
into the darkness, he was a hunted creature flying from pursuit.
In all probability he and I would never meet again. . . .

I brought myself back with a jerk to the actualities of the moment.
It was no good thinking sentimentally of Harry Rayburn. He had
displayed the greatest antipathy to me from the first. Or, at
least——There I was again—dreaming! The real problem was what to
do—_now!_

I, priding myself upon my rôle of watcher, had become the watched.
And I was afraid! For the first time I began to lose my nerve. I
was the little bit of grit that was impeding the smooth working of
the great machine—and I fancied that the machine would have a short
way with little bits of grit. Once Harry Rayburn had saved me, once
I had saved myself—but I felt suddenly that the odds were heavily
against me. My enemies were all around me in every direction, and
they were closing in. If I continued to play a lone hand I was
doomed.

I rallied myself with an effort. After all, what could they do? I
was in a civilized city—with policemen every few yards. I would be
wary in future. They should not trap me again as they had done in
Muizenberg.

As I reached this point in my meditations, the train arrived at
Adderly Street. I got out. Undecided what to do, I walked slowly
up the left-hand side of the street. I did not trouble to look if
my watcher was behind me. I knew he was. I walked into Cartwright’s
and ordered two coffee ice-cream sodas—to steady my nerves. A man,
I suppose, would have had a stiff peg; but girls derive a lot of
comfort from ice-cream sodas. I applied myself to the end of the
straw with gusto. The cool liquid went trickling down my throat in
the most agreeable manner. I pushed the first glass aside empty.

I was sitting on one of the little high stools in front of the
counter. Out of the tail of my eye, I saw my tracker come in and
sit down unostentatiously at a little table near the door. I
finished the second coffee soda and demanded a maple one. I can
drink practically an unlimited amount of ice-cream sodas.

Suddenly the man by the door got up and went out. That surprised
me. If he was going to wait outside, why not wait outside from the
beginning. I slipped down from my stool and went cautiously to the
door. I drew back quickly into the shadow. The man was talking to
Guy Pagett.

If I had ever had any doubts, that would have settled it. Pagett
had his watch out and was looking at it. They exchanged a few brief
words, and then the secretary swung on down the street towards the
station. Evidently he had given his orders. But what were they?

Suddenly my heart leapt into my mouth. The man who had followed me
crossed to the middle of the road and spoke to a policeman. He
spoke at some length, gesticulating towards Cartwright’s and
evidently explaining something. I saw the plan at once. I was to
be arrested on some charge or other—pocket-picking, perhaps. It
would be easy enough for the gang to put through a simple little
matter like that. Of what good to protest my innocence? They would
have seen to every detail. Long ago they had brought a charge of
robbing De Beers against Harry Rayburn, and he had not been able
to disprove it, though I had little doubt but that he had been
absolutely blameless. What chance had I against such a “frame up”
as the “Colonel” could devise?

I glanced up at the clock almost mechanically, and immediately
another aspect of the case struck me. I saw the point of Guy
Pagett’s looking at his watch. It was just on eleven, and at eleven
the mail train left for Rhodesia bearing with it the influential
friends who might otherwise come to my rescue. That was the reason
of my immunity up to now. From last night till eleven this morning
I had been safe, but now the net was closing in upon me.

I hurriedly opened my bag and paid for my drinks, and as I did so,
my heart seemed to stand still, _for inside it was a man’s wallet
stuffed with notes!_ It must have been deftly introduced into my
handbag as I left the tram.

Promptly I lost my head. I hurried out of Cartwright’s. The little
man with the big nose and the policeman were just crossing the
road. They saw me, and the little man designated me excitedly to
the policeman. I took to my heels and ran. I judged him to be a
slow policeman. I should get a start. But I had no plan, even then.
I just ran for my life down Adderly Street. People began to stare.
I felt that in another minute some one would stop me.

An idea flashed into my head.

“The station?” I asked, in a breathless gasp.

“Just down on the right.”

I sped on. It is permissible to run for a train. I turned into the
station, but as I did so I heard footsteps close behind me. The
little man with the big nose was a champion sprinter. I foresaw
that I should be stopped before I got to the platform I was in
search of. I looked up to the clock—one minute to eleven. I might
just do it if my plan succeeded.

I had entered the station by the main entrance in Adderly Street.
I now darted out again through the side exit. Directly opposite me
was the side entrance to the post office, the main entrance to
which is in Adderly Street.

As I expected, my pursuer, instead of following me in, ran down
the street to cut me off when I emerged by the main entrance, or
to warn the policeman to do so.

In an instant I slipped across the street again and back into the
station. I ran like a lunatic. It was just eleven. The long train
was moving as I appeared on the platform. A porter tried to stop
me, but I wriggled myself out of his grasp and sprang upon the
footboard. I mounted the two steps and opened the gate. I was safe!
The train was gathering way.

We passed a man standing by himself at the end of the platform. I
waved to him.

“Good-bye, Mr. Pagett,” I shouted.

Never have I seen a man more taken aback. He looked as though he
had seen a ghost.

In a minute or two I was having trouble with the conductor. But I
took a lofty tone.

“I am Sir Eustace Pedler’s secretary,” I said haughtily. “Please
take me to his private car.”

Suzanne and Colonel Race were standing on the rear observation
platform. They both uttered an exclamation of utter surprise at
seeing me.

“Hullo, Miss Anne,” cried Colonel Race, “where have you turned up
from? I thought you’d gone to Durban. What an unexpected person
you are.”

Suzanne said nothing, but her eyes asked a hundred questions.

“I must report myself to my chief,” I said demurely. “Where is he?”

“He’s in the office—middle compartment—dictating at an incredible
rate to the unfortunate Miss Pettigrew.”

“This enthusiasm for work is something new,” I commented.

“H’m!” said Colonel Race. “His idea is, I think, to give her
sufficient work to chain her to her typewriter in her own
compartment for the rest of the day.”

I laughed. Then, followed by the other two, I sought out Sir
Eustace. He was striding up and down the circumscribed space,
hurling a flood of words at the unfortunate secretary whom I now
saw for the first time. A tall, square woman in drab clothing, with
pince-nez and an efficient air. I judged that she was finding it
difficult to keep pace with Sir Eustace, for her pencil was flying
along, and she was frowning horribly.

I stepped into the compartment.

“Come aboard, sir,” I said saucily.

Sir Eustace paused dead in the middle of a complicated sentence on
the labour situation and stared at me. Miss Pettigrew must be a
nervous creature, in spite of her efficient air, for she jumped as
though she had been shot.

“God bless my soul!” ejaculated Sir Eustace. “What about the young
man in Durban?”

“I prefer you,” I said softly.

“Darling,” said Sir Eustace. “You can start holding my hand at
once.”

Miss Pettigrew coughed, and Sir Eustace hastily withdrew his hand.

“Ah, yes,” he said. “Let me see, where were we? Yes. Tylman Roos,
in his speech at——What’s the matter? Why aren’t you taking it
down?”

“I think,” said Colonel Race gently, “that Miss Pettigrew has
broken her pencil.”

He took it from her and sharpened it. Sir Eustace stared, and so
did I. There was something in Colonel Race’s tone that I did not
quite understand.




  CHAPTER XXII


_(Extract from the diary of Sir Eustace Pedler)_


I am inclined to abandon my Reminiscences. Instead I shall write
a short article entitled “Secretaries I have had.” As regards
secretaries, I seem to have fallen under a blight. At one minute
I have no secretaries, at another I have too many. At the present
minute I am journeying to Rhodesia with a pack of women. Race goes
off with the two best-looking, of course, and leaves me with the
dud. That is what always happens to me—and, after all, this is _my_
private car, not Race’s.

Also Anne Beddingfeld is accompanying me to Rhodesia on the pretext
of being my temporary secretary. But all this afternoon she has
been out on the observation platform with Race exclaiming at the
beauty of the Hex River Pass. It is true that I told her her
principal duty would be to hold my hand. But she isn’t even doing
that. Perhaps she is afraid of Miss Pettigrew. I don’t blame her
if so. There is nothing attractive about Miss Pettigrew—she is a
repellent female with large feet, more like a man than a woman.

There is something very mysterious about Anne Beddingfeld. She
jumped on board the train at the last minute, puffing like a
steam-engine for all the world as though she’d been running a
race—and yet Pagett told me that he’d seen her off to Durban last
night! Either Pagett has been drinking again or else the girl must
have an astral body.

And she never explains. Nobody ever explains. Yes, “Secretaries I
have had.” No. 1, a murderer fleeing from justice. No. 2, a secret
drinker who carries on disreputable intrigues in Italy. No. 3, a
beautiful girl who possesses the useful faculty of being in two
places at once. No. 4, Miss Pettigrew, who, I have no doubt, is
really a particularly dangerous crook in disguise! Probably one of
Pagett’s Italian friends that he has palmed off on me. I shouldn’t
wonder if the world found some day that it had been grossly deceived
by Pagett. On the whole, I think Rayburn was the best of the bunch.
He never worried me or got in my way. Guy Pagett has had the
impertinence to have the stationery trunk put in here. None of us
can move without falling over it.

I went out on the observation platform just now, expecting my
appearance to be greeted with hails of delight. Both the women were
listening spellbound to one of Race’s travellers’ tales. I shall
label this car—not “Sir Eustace Pedler and Party,” but “Colonel
Race and Harem.”

Then Mrs. Blair must needs begin taking silly photographs. Every
time we went round a particularly appalling curve, as we climbed
higher and higher, she snapped at the engine.

“You see the point,” she cried delightedly. “It must be some curve
if you can photograph the front part of the train from the back,
and with the mountain background it will look awfully dangerous.”

I pointed out to her that no one could possibly tell it had been
taken from the back of the train. She looked at me pityingly.

“I shall write underneath it: ‘Taken from the train. Engine going
round a curve.’”

“You could write that under any snapshot of a train,” I said. Women
never think of these simple things.

“I’m glad we’ve come up here in daylight,” cried Anne Beddingfeld.
“I shouldn’t have seen this if I’d gone last night to Durban,
should I?”

“No,” said Colonel Race, smiling. “You’d have waked up to-morrow
morning to find yourself in the Karoo, a hot, dusty desert of
stones and rocks.”

“I’m glad I changed my mind,” said Anne, sighing contentedly, and
looking round.

It was rather a wonderful sight. The great mountains all around,
through which we turned and twisted and laboured ever steadily
upwards.

“Is this the best train in the day to Rhodesia?” asked Anne
Beddingfeld.

“In the day?” laughed Race. “Why, my dear Miss Anne, there are only
three trains a week. Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. Do you
realize that you don’t arrive at the Falls until Saturday next?”

“How well we shall know each other by that time,” said Mrs. Blair
maliciously. “How long are you going to stay at the Falls, Sir
Eustace?”

“That depends,” I said cautiously.

“On what?”

“On how things go at Johannesburg. My original idea was to stay a
couple of days or so at the Falls—which I’ve never seen, though
this is my third visit to Africa—and then go on to Jo’burg and
study the conditions of things on the Rand. At home, you know, I
pose as being an authority on South African politics. But from all
I hear, Jo’burg will be a particularly unpleasant place to visit
in about a week’s time. I don’t want to study conditions in the
midst of a raging revolution.”

Race smiled in a rather superior manner.

“I think your fears are exaggerated, Sir Eustace. There will be no
great danger in Jo’burg.”

The women immediately looked at him in the “What a brave hero you
are” manner. It annoyed me intensely. I am every bit as brave as
Race—but I lack the figure. These long, lean, brown men have it
all their own way.

“I suppose you’ll be there,” I said coldly.

“Very possibly. We might travel together.”

“I’m not sure that I shan’t stay on at the Falls a bit,” I answered
non-committally. Why is Race so anxious that I should go to Jo’burg?
He’s got his eye on Anne, I believe. “What are your plans, Miss
Anne?”

“That depends,” she replied demurely, copying me.

“I thought you were my secretary,” I objected.

“Oh, but I’ve been cut out. You’ve been holding Miss Pettigrew’s
hand all the afternoon.”

“Whatever I’ve been doing, I can swear I’ve not been doing that,”
I assured her.

_Thursday night._

We have just left Kimberley. Race was made to tell the story of
the diamond robbery all over again. Why are women so excited by
anything to do with diamonds?

At last Anne Beddingfeld has shed her veil of mystery. It seems
that she’s a newspaper correspondent. She sent an immense cable
from De Aar this morning. To judge by the jabbering that went on
nearly all night in Mrs. Blair’s cabin, she must have been reading
aloud all her special articles for years to come.

It seems that all along she’s been on the track of “The Man in the
Brown Suit.” Apparently she didn’t spot him on the _Kilmorden_—in
fact, she hardly had the chance, but she’s now very busy cabling
home: “How I journeyed out with the Murderer,” and inventing highly
fictitious stories of “What he said to me,” etc. I know how these
things are done. I do them myself, in my Reminiscences when Pagett
will let me. And of course one of Nasby’s efficient staff will
brighten up the details still more, so that when it appears in the
_Daily Budget_ Rayburn won’t recognize himself.

The girl’s clever, though. All on her own, apparently, she’s
ferreted out the identity of the woman who was killed in my house.
She was a Russian dancer called Nadina. I asked Anne Beddingfeld
if she was sure of this. She replied that it was merely a
deduction—quite in the Sherlock Holmes manner. However, I gather
that she had cabled it home to Nasby as a proved fact. Women have
these intuitions—I’ve no doubt that Anne Beddingfeld is perfectly
right in her guess—but to call it a deduction is absurd.

How she ever got on the staff of the _Daily Budget_ is more than
I can imagine. But she is the kind of young woman who does these
things. Impossible to withstand her. She is full of coaxing ways
that mask an invincible determination. Look how she has got into
my private car!

I am beginning to have an inkling why. Race said something about
the police suspecting that Rayburn would make for Rhodesia. He
might just have got off by Monday’s train. They telegraphed all
along the line, I presume, and no one of his description was found,
but that says little. He’s an astute young man and he knows Africa.
He’s probably exquisitely disguised as an old Kafir woman—and the
simple police continue to look for a handsome young man with a
scar, dressed in the height of European fashion. I never did quite
swallow that scar.

Anyway, Anne Beddingfeld is on his track. She wants the glory of
discovering him for herself and the _Daily Budget._ Young women
are very cold-blooded nowadays. I hinted to her that it was an
unwomanly action. She laughed at me. She assured me that did she
run him to earth her fortune was made. Race doesn’t like it,
either, I can see. Perhaps Rayburn is on this train. If so, we may
all be murdered in our beds. I said so to Mrs. Blair—but she seemed
quite to welcome the idea, and remarked that if I were murdered it
would be really a terrific scoop for Anne! A scoop for Anne indeed!

To-morrow we shall be going through Bechuanaland. The dust will be
atrocious. Also at every station, little Kafir children come and
sell you quaint wooden animals that they carve themselves. Also
mealie bowls and baskets. I am rather afraid that Mrs. Blair may
run amok. There is a primitive charm about these toys that I feel
will appeal to her.

_Friday evening._

As I feared. Mrs. Blair and Anne have bought forty-nine wooden
animals!




  CHAPTER XXIII


_(Anne’s Narrative Resumed)_


I thoroughly enjoyed the journey up to Rhodesia.

There was something new and exciting to see every day. First the
wonderful scenery of the Hex river valley, then the desolate
grandeur of the Karoo, and finally that wonderful straight stretch
of line in Bechuanaland, and the perfectly adorable toys the
natives brought to sell. Suzanne and I were nearly left behind at
each station—if you could call them stations. It seemed to me that
the train just stopped whenever it felt like it, and no sooner had
it done so than a horde of natives materialized out of the empty
landscape, holding up mealie bowls and sugar canes and fur karosses
and adorable carved wooden animals. Suzanne began at once to make
a collection of the latter. I imitated her example—most of them
cost a “tiki” (threepence) and each was different. There were
giraffes and tigers and snakes and a melancholy looking eland and
absurd little black warriors. We enjoyed ourselves enormously.

Sir Eustace tried to restrain us—but in vain. I still think it was
a miracle we were not left behind at some oasis of the line. South
African trains don’t hoot or get excited when they are going to
start off again. They just glide quietly away, and you look up from
your bargaining and run for your life.

Suzanne’s amazement at seeing me climb upon the train at Cape Town
can be imagined. We held an exhaustive survey of the situation on
the first evening out. We talked half the night.

It had become clear to me that defensive tactics must be adopted
as well as aggressive ones. Travelling with Sir Eustace Pedler and
his party, I was fairly safe. Both he and Colonel Race were powerful
protectors, and I judged that my enemies would not wish to stir up
a hornet’s nest about _my_ ears. Also, as long as I was near Sir
Eustace, I was more or less in touch with Guy Pagett—and Guy Pagett
was the heart of the mystery. I asked Suzanne whether in her
opinion it was possible that Pagett himself was the mysterious
“Colonel.” His subordinate position was, of course, against the
assumption, but it had struck me once or twice that, for all his
autocratic ways, Sir Eustace was really very much influenced by
his secretary. He was an easy-going man, and one whom an adroit
secretary might be able to twist round his little finger. The
comparative obscurity of his position might in reality be useful
to him, since he would be anxious to be well out of the limelight.

Suzanne, however, negatived these ideas very strongly. She refused
to believe that Guy Pagett was the ruling spirit. The real head—the
“Colonel”—was somewhere in the background and had probably been
already in Africa at the time of our arrival.

I agreed that there was much to be said for her view, but I was
not entirely satisfied. For in each suspicious instance Pagett had
been shown as the directing genius. It was true that his personality
seemed to lack the assurance and decision that one would expect
from a master criminal—but after all, according to Colonel Race,
it was brain work only that this mysterious leader supplied, and
creative genius is often allied to a weak and timorous physical
constitution.

“There speaks the Professor’s daughter,” interrupted Suzanne, when
I had got to this point in my argument.

“It’s true, all the same. On the other hand, Pagett may be the
Grand Vizier, so to speak, of the All Highest.” I was silent for
a minute or two, and then went on musingly: “I wish I knew how Sir
Eustace made his money!”

“Suspecting him again?”

“Suzanne, I’ve got into that state that I can’t help suspecting
somebody! I don’t really suspect him—but, after all, he _is_
Pagett’s employer, and he _did_ own the Mill House.”

“I’ve always heard that he made his money in some way he isn’t
anxious to talk about,” said Suzanne thoughtfully. “But that
doesn’t necessarily mean crime—it might be tin-tacks or hair
restorer!”

I agreed ruefully.

“I suppose,” said Suzanne doubtfully, “that we’re not barking up
the wrong tree? Being led completely astray, I mean, by assuming
Pagett’s complicity? Supposing that, after all, he is a perfectly
honest man?”

I considered that for a minute or two, then I shook my head.

“I can’t believe that.”

“After all, he has his explanations for everything.”

“Y—es, but they’re not very convincing. For instance, the night he
tried to throw me overboard on the _Kilmorden,_ he says he followed
Rayburn up on deck and Rayburn turned and knocked him down. Now we
know that’s not true.”

“No,” said Suzanne unwillingly. “But we only heard the story at
second-hand from Sir Eustace. If we’d heard it direct from Pagett
himself, it might have been different. You know how people always
get a story a little wrong when they repeat it.”

I turned the thing over in my mind.

“No,” I said at last, “I don’t see any way out. Pagett’s guilty.
You can’t get away from the fact that he tried to throw me
overboard, and everything else fits in. Why are you so persistent
in this new idea of yours?”

“Because of his face?”

“His face? But——”

“Yes, I know what you’re going to say. It’s a sinister face. That’s
just it. No man with a face like that could be really sinister. It
must be a colossal joke on the part of Nature.”

I did not believe much in Suzanne’s argument. I know a lot about
Nature in past ages. If she’s got a sense of humour, she doesn’t
show it much. Suzanne is just the sort of person who would clothe
Nature with all her own attributes.

We passed on to discuss our immediate plans. It was clear to me
that I must have some kind of standing. I couldn’t go on avoiding
explanations for ever. The solution of all my difficulties lay
ready to my hand, though I didn’t think of it for some time. The
_Daily Budget!_ My silence or my speech could no longer affect
Harry Rayburn. He was marked down as “The Man in the Brown Suit”
through no fault of mine. I could help him best by seeming to be
against him. The “Colonel” and his gang must have no suspicion that
there existed any friendly feeling between me and the man they had
elected to be the scapegoat of the murder at Marlow. As far as I
knew, the woman killed was still unidentified. I would cable to
Lord Nasby, suggesting that she was no other than the famous
Russian dancer “Nadina” who had been delighting Paris for so long.
It seemed incredible to me that she had not been identified
already—but when I learnt more of the case long afterwards I saw
how natural it really was.

Nadina had never been to England during her successful career in
Paris. She was unknown to London audiences. The pictures in the
papers of the Marlow victim were so blurred and unrecognizable that
it is small wonder no one identified them. And, on the other hand,
Nadina had kept her intention of visiting England a profound secret
from every one. The day after the murder a letter had been received
by her manager purporting to be from the dancer, in which she said
that she was returning to Russia on urgent private affairs and that
he must deal with her broken contract as best he could.

All this, of course, I only learned afterwards. With Suzanne’s full
approval, I sent a long cable from De Aar. It arrived at a
psychological moment (this again, of course, I learnt afterwards).
The _Daily Budget_ was hard up for a sensation. My guess was
verified and proved to be correct and the _Daily Budget_ had the
scoop of its lifetime. “Victim of the Mill House Murder identified
by our special reporter.” And so on. “Our reporter makes voyage
with the murderer. ‘The Man in the Brown Suit.’ What he is really
like.”

The main facts were, of course, cabled to the South African papers,
but I only read my own lengthy articles at a much later date! I
received approval and full instructions by cable at Bulawayo. I
was on the staff of the _Daily Budget,_ and I had a private word
of congratulation from Lord Nasby himself. I was definitely
accredited to hunt down the murderer, and I, and only I, knew that
the murderer was not Harry Rayburn! But let the world think that
it was he—best so for the present.




  CHAPTER XXIV


We arrived at Bulawayo early on Saturday morning. I was disappointed
in the place. It was very hot, and I hated the hotel. Also Sir
Eustace was what I can only describe as thoroughly sulky. I think
it was all our wooden animals that annoyed him—especially the big
giraffe. It was a colossal giraffe with an impossible neck, a mild
eye and a dejected tail. It had character. It had charm. A
controversy was already arising as to whom it belonged—me or
Suzanne. We had each contributed a tiki to its purchase. Suzanne
advanced the claims of seniority and the married state, I stuck to
the position that I had been the first to behold its beauty.

In the meantime, I must admit, it occupied a good deal of this
three-dimensional space of ours. To carry forty-nine wooden animals,
all of awkward shape, and all of extremely brittle wood, is somewhat
of a problem. Two porters were laden with a bunch of animals
each—and one promptly dropped a ravishing group of ostriches and
broke their heads off. Warned by this, Suzanne and I carried all
we could, Colonel Race helped, and I pressed the big giraffe into
Sir Eustace’s arms. Even the correct Miss Pettigrew did not escape,
a large hippopotamus and two black warriors fell to her share. I
had a feeling Miss Pettigrew didn’t like me. Perhaps she fancied
I was a bold hussy. Anyway, she avoided me as much as she could.
And the funny thing was, her face seemed vaguely familiar to me,
though I couldn’t quite place it.

We reposed ourselves most of the morning, and in the afternoon we
drove out to the Matoppos to see Rhodes’s grave. That is to say,
we were to have done so, but at the last moment Sir Eustace backed
out. He was very nearly in as bad a temper as the morning we
arrived at Cape Town—when he bounced the peaches on the floor and
they squashed! Evidently arriving early in the morning at places
is bad for his temperament. He cursed the porters, he cursed the
waiters at breakfast, he cursed the whole hotel management, he
would doubtless have liked to curse Miss Pettigrew who hovered
around with her pencil and pad, but I don’t think even Sir Eustace
would have dared to curse Miss Pettigrew. She’s just like the
efficient secretary in a book. I only rescued our dear giraffe just
in time. I feel Sir Eustace would have liked to dash him to the
ground.

To return to our expedition, after Sir Eustace had backed out, Miss
Pettigrew said she would remain at home in case he might want her.
And at the very last minute Suzanne sent down a message to say she
had a headache. So Colonel Race and I drove off alone.

He is a strange man. One doesn’t notice it so much in a crowd. But,
when one is alone with him, the sense of his personality seems
really almost overpowering. He becomes more taciturn, and yet his
silence seems to say more than speech might do.

It was so that day that we drove to the Matoppos through the soft
yellow brown scrub. Everything seemed strangely silent—except our
car which I should think was the first Ford ever made by man! The
upholstery of it was torn to ribbons and, though I know nothing
about engines, even I could guess that all was not as it should be
in its interior.

By and by the character of the country changed. Great boulders
appeared, piled up into fantastic shapes. I felt suddenly that I
had got into a primitive era. Just for a moment Neanderthal men
seemed quite as real to me as they had to Papa. I turned to Colonel
Race.

“There must have been giants once,” I said dreamily. “And their
children were just like children are to-day—they played with
handfuls of pebbles, piling them up and knocking them down, and
the more cleverly they balanced them, the better pleased they were.
If I were to give a name to this place I should call it ‘The
Country of Giant Children.’”

“Perhaps you’re nearer the mark than you know,” said Colonel Race
gravely. “Simple, primitive, big—that is Africa.”

I nodded appreciatively.

“You love it, don’t you?” I asked.

“Yes. But to live in it long—well, it makes one what you would call
cruel. One comes to hold life and death very lightly.”

“Yes,” I said, thinking of Harry Rayburn. He had been like that
too. “But not cruel to weak things?”

“Opinions differ as to what are and are not ‘weak things,’ Miss
Anne.”

There was a note of seriousness in his voice which almost startled
me. I felt that I knew very little really of this man at my side.

“I meant children and dogs, I think.”

“I can truthfully say I’ve never been cruel to children or dogs.
So you don’t class women as ‘weak things’?”

I considered.

“No, I don’t think I do—though they are, I suppose. That is, they
are nowadays. But Papa always said that in the beginning men and
women roamed the world together, equal in strength—like lions and
tigers——”

“And giraffes?” interpolated Colonel Race slyly.

I laughed. Every one makes fun of that giraffe.

“And giraffes. They were nomadic, you see. It wasn’t till they
settled down in communities, and women did one kind of thing and
men another that women got weak. And of course, underneath, one is
still the same—one _feels_ the same, I mean, and that is why women
worship physical strength in men—it’s what they once had and have
lost.”

“Almost ancestor worship, in fact?”

“Something of the kind.”

“And you really think that’s true? That women worship strength, I
mean?”

“I think it’s quite true—if one’s honest. You think you admire
moral qualities, but when you fall in love, you revert to the
primitive where the physical is all that counts. But I don’t think
that’s the end—if you lived in primitive conditions it would be
all right, but you don’t—and so, in the end, the other thing wins
after all. It’s the things that are apparently conquered that
always do win, isn’t it? They win in the only way that counts. Like
what the Bible says about losing your soul and finding it.”

“In the end,” said Colonel Race thoughtfully, “you fall in love—and
you fall out of it, is that what you mean?”

“Not exactly, but you can put it that way if you like.”

“But I don’t think you’ve ever fallen out of love, Miss Anne?”

“No, I haven’t,” I admitted frankly.

“Or fallen in love, either?”

I did not answer.

The car drew up at our destination and brought the conversation to
a close. We got out and began the slow ascent to the World’s View.
Not for the first time, I felt a slight discomfort in Colonel
Race’s company. He veiled his thoughts so well behind those
impenetrable black eyes.

He frightened me a little. He had always frightened me. I never
knew where I stood with him.

We climbed in silence till we reached the spot where Rhodes lies
guarded by giant boulders. A strange eerie place, far from the
haunts of men, that sings a ceaseless pæan of rugged beauty.

We sat there for some time in silence. Then descended once more,
but diverging slightly from the path. Sometimes it was a rough
scramble and once we came to a sharp slope or rock that was almost
sheer.

Colonel Race went first, then turned to help me.

“Better lift you,” he said suddenly, and swung me off my feet with
a quick gesture.

I felt the strength of him as he set me down and released his
clasp. A man of iron, with muscles like taut steel. And again, I
felt afraid, especially as he did not move aside, but stood directly
in front of me, staring into my face.

“What are you really doing here, Anne Beddingfeld?” he said
abruptly.

“I’m a gipsy seeing the world.”

“Yes, that’s true enough. The newspaper correspondent is only a
pretext. You’ve not the soul of the journalist. You’re out for your
own hand—snatching at life. But that’s not all.”

What was he going to make me tell him? I was afraid—afraid. I
looked him full in the face. My eyes can’t keep secrets like his,
but they can carry the war into the enemy’s country.

“What are _you_ really doing here, Colonel Race?” I asked
deliberately.

For a moment I thought he wasn’t going to answer. He was clearly
taken aback, though. At last he spoke, and his words seemed to
afford him a grim amusement.

“Pursuing ambition,” he said. “Just that—pursuing ambition. You
will remember, Miss Beddingfeld, that ‘by that sin fell the angels,’
etc.”

“They say,” I said slowly, “that you are really connected with the
Government—that you are in the Secret Service. Is that true?”

Was it my fancy, or did he hesitate for a fraction of a second
before he answered?

“I can assure you, Miss Beddingfeld, that I am out here strictly
as a private individual travelling for my own pleasure.”

Thinking the answer over later, it struck me as slightly ambiguous.
Perhaps he meant it to be so.

We rejoined the car in silence. Half-way back to Bulawayo we
stopped for tea at a somewhat primitive structure at the side of
the road. The proprietor was digging in the garden and seemed
annoyed at being disturbed. But he graciously promised to see what
he could do. After an interminable wait he brought us some stale
cakes and some lukewarm tea. Then he disappeared to his garden
again.

No sooner had he departed than we were surrounded by cats. Six of
them all miaowing piteously at once. The racket was deafening. I
offered them some pieces of cake. They devoured them ravenously.
I poured all the milk there was into a saucer and they fought each
other to get it.

“Oh,” I cried indignantly, “they’re starved! It’s wicked. Please,
please, order some more milk and another plate of cake.”

Colonel Race departed silently to do my bidding. The cats had begun
miaowing again. He returned with a big jug of milk and the cats
finished it all.

I got up with determination on my face.

“I’m going to take those cats home with us—I shan’t leave them
here.”

“My dear child, don’t be absurd. You can’t carry six cats as well
as fifty wooden animals round with you.”

“Never mind the wooden animals. These cats are alive. I shall take
them back with me.”

“You will do nothing of the kind.” I looked at him resentfully,
but he went on: “You think me cruel—but one can’t go through life
sentimentalizing over these things. It’s no good standing out—I
shan’t allow you to take them. It’s a primitive country, you know,
and I’m stronger than you.”

I always know when I am beaten. I went down to the car with tears
in my eyes.

“They’re probably short of food just to-day,” he explained
consolingly. “That man’s wife has gone into Bulawayo for stores.
So it will be all right. And anyway, you know, the world’s full of
starving cats.”

“Don’t—don’t,” I said fiercely.

“I’m teaching you to realize life as it is. I’m teaching you to be
hard and ruthless—like I am. That’s the secret of strength—and the
secret of success.”

“I’d sooner be dead than hard,” I said passionately.

We got into the car and started off. I pulled myself together again
slowly. Suddenly, to my intense astonishment, he took my hand in
his.

“Anne,” he said gently, “I want you. Will you marry me?”

I was utterly taken aback.

“Oh, no,” I stammered. “I can’t.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t care for you in that way. I’ve never thought of you like
that.”

“I see. Is that the only reason?”

I had to be honest. I owed it him.

“No,” I said, “it is not. You see—I—care for some one else.”

“I see,” he said again. “And was that true at the beginning—when
I first saw you—on the _Kilmorden?”_

“No,” I whispered. “It was—since then.”

“I see,” he said for the third time, but this time there was a
purposeful ring in his voice that made me turn and look at him.
His face was grimmer than I had ever seen it.

“What—what do you mean?” I faltered.

He looked at me, inscrutable, dominating.

“Only—that I know now what I have to do.”

His words sent a shiver through me. There was a determination
behind them that I did not understand—and it frightened me.

We neither of us said any more until we got back to the hotel. I
went straight up to Suzanne. She was lying on her bed reading, and
did not look in the least as though she had a headache.

“Here reposes the perfect gooseberry,” she remarked. _“Alias_ the
tactful chaperone. Why, Anne dear, what’s the matter?”

For I had burst into a flood of tears.

I told her about the cats—I felt it wasn’t fair to tell her about
Colonel Race. But Suzanne is very sharp. I think she saw that there
was something more behind.

“You haven’t caught a chill, have you, Anne? Sounds absurd even to
suggest such things in this heat, but you keep on shivering.”

“It’s nothing,” I said. “Nerves—or some one walking over my grave.
I keep feeling something dreadful’s going to happen.”

“Don’t be silly,” said Suzanne, with decision. “Let’s talk of
something interesting. Anne, about those diamonds——”

“What about them?”

“I’m not sure they’re safe with me. It was all right before, no
one could think they’d be amongst my things. But now that every
one knows we’re such friends, you and I, I’ll be under suspicion
too.”

“Nobody knows they’re in a roll of films, though,” I argued. “It’s
a splendid hiding-place and I really don’t think we could better
it.”

She agreed doubtfully, but said we would discuss it again when we
got to the Falls.

Our train went at nine o’clock. Sir Eustace’s temper was still far
from good, and Miss Pettigrew looked subdued. Colonel Race was
completely himself. I felt that I had dreamed the whole conversation
on the way back.

I slept heavily that night on my hard bunk, struggling with
ill-defined, menacing dreams. I awoke with a headache and went out
on the observation platform of the car. It was fresh and lovely,
and everywhere, as far as one could see, were the undulating wooded
hills. I loved it—loved it more than any place I had ever seen. I
wished then that I could have a little hut somewhere in the heart
of the scrub and live there always—always. . . .

Just before half-past two, Colonel Race called me out from the
“office” and pointed to a bouquet-shaped white mist that hovered
over one portion of the bush.

“The spray from the Falls,” he said. “We are nearly there.”

I was still wrapped in that strange dream feeling of exaltation
that had succeeded my troubled night. Very strongly implanted in
me was the feeling that I had come home. . . . Home! And yet I had
never been here before—or had I in dreams?

We walked from the train to the hotel, a big white building closely
wired against mosquitoes. There were no roads, no houses. We went
out on the _stoep_ and I uttered a gasp. There, half a mile away,
facing us, were the Falls. I’ve never seen anything so grand and
beautiful—I never shall.

“Anne, you’re fey,” said Suzanne, as we sat down to lunch. “I’ve
never seen you like this before.”

She stared at me curiously.

“Am I?” I laughed, but I felt that my laugh was unnatural. “It’s
just that I love it all.”

“It’s more than that.”

A little frown creased her brow—one of apprehension.

Yes, I was happy, but beyond that I had the curious feeling that
I was waiting for something—something that would happen soon. I
was excited—restless.

After tea we strolled out, got on the trolley and were pushed by
smiling blacks down the little tracks of rails to the bridge.

It was a marvellous sight, the great chasm and the rushing waters
below, and the veil of mist and spray in front of us that parted
every now and then for one brief minute to show the cataract of
water and then closed up again in its impenetrable mystery. That,
to my mind, has always been the fascination of the Falls—their
elusive quality. You always think you’re going to see—and you never
do.

We crossed the bridge and walked slowly on by the path that was
marked out with white stone on either side and led round the brink
of the gorge. Finally we arrived in a big clearing where on the
left a path led downwards towards the chasm.

“The palm gully,” explained Colonel Race. “Shall we go down? Or
shall we leave it until to-morrow? It will take some time, and it’s
a good climb up again.”

“We’ll leave it until to-morrow,” said Sir Eustace with decision.
He isn’t at all fond of strenuous physical exercise, I have noticed.

He led the way back. As we went, we passed a fine native stalking
along. Behind him came a woman who seemed to have the entire
household belongings piled upon her head! The collection included
a frying pan!

“I never have my camera when I want it,” groaned Suzanne.

“That’s an opportunity that will occur often enough, Mrs. Blair,”
said Colonel Race. “So don’t lament.”

We arrived back on the bridge.

“Shall we go into the rainbow forest?” he continued. “Or are you
afraid of getting wet?”

Suzanne and I accompanied him. Sir Eustace went back to the hotel.
I was rather disappointed in the rainbow forest. There weren’t
nearly enough rainbows, and we got soaked to the skin, but every
now and then we got a glimpse of the Falls opposite and realized
how enormously wide they are. Oh, dear, dear Falls, how I love and
worship you and always shall!

We got back to the hotel just in time to change for dinner. Sir
Eustace seems to have taken a positive antipathy to Colonel Race.
Suzanne and I rallied him gently, but didn’t get much satisfaction.

After dinner, he retired to his sitting-room, dragging Miss
Pettigrew with him. Suzanne and I talked for a while with Colonel
Race, and then she declared, with an immense yawn, that she was
going to bed. I didn’t want to be left alone with him, so I got up
too and went to my room.

But I was far too excited to go to sleep. I did not even undress.
I lay back in a chair and gave myself up to dreaming. And all the
time I was conscious of something coming nearer and nearer. . . .

There was a knock at the door and I started. I got up and went to
it. A little black boy held out a note. It was addressed to me in
a handwriting I did not know. I took it and came back into the
room. I stood there holding it. At last I opened it. It was very
short:

“I must see you. I dare not come to the hotel. Will you come to
the clearing by the palm gully? In memory of Cabin 17 please come.
The man you knew as Harry Rayburn.”

My heart beat to suffocation. He was here then! Oh, I had known
it—I had known it all along! I had felt him near me. All unwittingly
I had come to his place of retreat.

I wound a scarf round my head and stole to the door. I must be
careful. He was hunted down. No one must see me meet him. I stole
along to Suzanne’s room. She was fast asleep. I could hear her
breathing evenly.

Sir Eustace? I paused outside the door of his sitting-room. Yes,
he was dictating to Miss Pettigrew, I could hear her monotonous
voice repeating. “I therefore venture to suggest, that in tackling
this problem of coloured labour——” She paused for him to continue,
and I heard him grunt something angrily.

I stole on again. Colonel Race’s room was empty. I did not see him
in the lounge. And he was the man I feared most! Still, I could
waste no more time. I slipped quickly out of the hotel and took
the path to the bridge.

I crossed it and stood there waiting in the shadow. If any one had
followed me, I should see them crossing the bridge. But the minutes
passed, and no one came. I had not been followed. I turned and took
the path to the clearing. I took six paces or so and then stopped.
Something had rustled behind me. It could not be any one who had
followed me from the hotel. It was some one who was already here,
waiting.

And immediately, without rhyme or reason, but with the sureness of
instinct, I knew that it was I myself who was threatened. It was
the same feeling as I had had on the _Kilmorden_ that night—a sure
instinct warning me of danger.

I looked sharply over my shoulder. Silence. I moved on a pace or
two. Again I heard that rustle. Still walking, I looked over my
shoulder again. A man’s figure came out of the shadow. He saw that
I saw him, and jumped forward, hard on my track.

It was too dark to recognize anybody. All I could see was that he
was tall, and a European, not a native. I took to my heels and ran.
I heard him pounding behind. I ran quicker, keeping my eyes fixed
on the white stones that showed me where to step, for there was no
moon that night.

And suddenly my foot felt nothingness. I heard the man behind me
laugh, an evil, sinister laugh. It rang in my ears, as I fell
headlong—down—down—down to destruction far beneath.




  CHAPTER XXV


I came to myself slowly and painfully. I was conscious of an aching
head and a shooting pain down my left arm when I tried to move,
and everything seemed dream-like and unreal. Nightmare visions
floated before me. I felt myself falling—falling again. Once Harry
Rayburn’s face seemed to come to me out of the mist. Almost I
imagined it real. Then it floated away again, mocking me. Once, I
remember, some one put a cup to my lips and I drank. A black face
grinned into mine—a devil’s face, I thought it, and screamed out.
Then dreams again—long troubled dreams in which I vainly sought
Harry Rayburn to warn him—warn him—what of? I did not know myself.
But there was some danger—some great danger—and I alone could save
him. Then darkness again, merciful darkness, and real sleep.

I woke at last myself again. The long nightmare was over. I
remembered perfectly everything that had happened, my hurried
flight from the hotel to meet Harry, the man in the shadows and
that last terrible moment of falling. . . .

By some miracle or other I had not been killed. I was bruised and
aching and very weak, but I was alive. But where was I? Moving my
head with difficulty I looked round me. I was in a small room with
rough wooden walls. On them were hung skins of animals and various
tusks of ivory. I was lying on a kind of rough couch, also covered
with skins, and my left arm was bandaged up and felt stiff and
uncomfortable. At first I thought I was alone, and then I saw a
man’s figure sitting between me and the light, his head turned
toward the window. He was so still that he might have been carved
out of wood. Something in the close-cropped black head was familiar
to me, but I did not dare to let my imagination run astray. Suddenly
he turned, and I caught my breath. It was Harry Rayburn. Harry
Rayburn in the flesh.

He rose and came over to me.

“Feeling better?” he said a trifle awkwardly.

I could not answer. The tears were running down my face. I was weak
still, but I held his hand in both of mine. If only I could die
like this, whilst he stood there looking down on me with that new
look in his eyes.

“Don’t cry, Anne. Please don’t cry. You’re safe now. No one shall
hurt you.”

He went and fetched a cup and brought it to me.

“Drink some of this milk.”

I drank obediently. He went on talking in a low coaxing tone such
as he might have used to a child.

“Don’t ask any more questions now. Go to sleep again. You’ll be
stronger by and by. I’ll go away if you like.”

“No,” I said urgently. “No, no.

“Then I’ll stay.”

He brought a small stool over beside me and sat there. He laid his
hand over mine, and, soothed and comforted, I dropped off to sleep
once more.

It must have been evening then, but when I woke again the sun was
high in the heavens. I was alone in the hut, but as I stirred an
old native woman came running in. She was hideous as sin, but she
grinned at me encouragingly. She brought me water in a basin and
helped me wash my face and hands. Then she brought me a large bowl
of soup, and I finished it every drop! I asked her several
questions, but she only grinned and nodded and chattered away in
a guttural language, so I gathered she knew no English.

Suddenly she stood up and drew back respectfully as Harry Rayburn
entered. He gave her a nod of dismissal and she went out leaving
us alone. He smiled at me.

“Really better to-day!”

“Yes, indeed, but very bewildered still. Where am I?”

“You’re on a small island on the Zambesi about four miles up from
the Falls.”

“Do—do my friends know I’m here?”

He shook his head.

“I must send word to them.”

“That is as you like of course, but if I were you I should wait
until you are a little stronger.”

“Why?”

He did not answer immediately, so I went on.

“How long have I been here?”

His answer amazed me.

“Nearly a month.”

“Oh!” I cried. “I must send word to Suzanne. She’ll be terribly
anxious.”

“Who is Suzanne?”

“Mrs. Blair. I was with her and Sir Eustace and Colonel Race at
the hotel—but you knew that surely?”

He shook his head.

“I know nothing, except that I found you, caught in the fork of a
tree, unconscious and with a badly wrenched arm.”

“Where was the tree?”

“Overhanging the ravine. But for your clothes catching on the
branches, you would infallibly have been dashed to pieces.”

I shuddered. Then a thought struck me.

“You say you didn’t know I was there. What about the note then?”

“What note?”

“The note you sent me, asking me to meet you in the clearing.”

He stared at me.

“I sent no note.”

I felt myself flushing up to the roots of my hair. Fortunately he
did not seem to notice.

“How did you come to be on the spot in such a marvellous manner?”
I asked in as nonchalant a manner as I could assume. “And what are
you doing in this part of the world, anyway?”

“I live here,” he said simply.

“On this island?”

“Yes, I came here after the War. Sometimes I take parties from the
hotel out in my boat, but it costs me very little to live, and
mostly I do as I please.”

“You live here all alone?”

“I am not pining for society, I assure you,” he replied coldly.

“I am sorry to have inflicted mine upon you,” I retorted, “but I
seem to have had very little to say in the matter.”

To my surprise his eyes twinkled a little.

“None whatever. I slung you across my shoulders like a sack of coal
and carried you to my boat. Quite like a primitive man of the Stone
Age.”

“But for a different reason,” I put in.

_He_ flushed this time, a deep burning blush. The tan of his face
was suffused.

“But you haven’t told me how you came to be wandering about so
conveniently for me?” I said hastily, to cover his confusion.

“I couldn’t sleep. I was restless—disturbed—had the feeling
something was going to happen. In the end I took the boat and came
ashore and tramped down towards the Falls. I was just at the head
of the palm gully when I heard you scream.”

“Why didn’t you get help from the hotel instead of carting me all
the way here?” I asked.

He flushed again.

“I suppose it seems an unpardonable liberty to you—but I don’t
think that even now you realize your danger! You think I should
have informed your friends? Pretty friends, who allowed you to be
decoyed out to death. No, I swore to myself that I’d take better
care of you than any one else could. Not a soul comes to this
island. I got old Batani, whom I cured of a fever once, to come
and look after you. She’s loyal. She’ll never say a word. I could
keep you here for months and no one would ever know.”

_I could keep you here for months and no one would ever know!_ How
some words please one!

“You did quite right,” I said quietly. “And I shall not send word
to any one. A day or so more anxiety doesn’t make much difference.
It’s not as though they were my own people. They’re only
acquaintances really—even Suzanne. And whoever wrote that note must
have known—a great deal. It was not the work of an outsider.”

I managed to mention the note this time without blushing at all.

“If you would be guided by me——” he said, hesitating.

“I don’t expect I shall be,” I answered candidly. “But there’s no
harm in hearing.”

“Do you always do what you like, Miss Beddingfeld?”

“Usually,” I replied cautiously. To any one else I would have said
“Always.”

“I pity your husband,” he said unexpectedly.

“You needn’t,” I retorted. “I shouldn’t dream of marrying any one
unless I was madly in love with them. And of course there is really
nothing a woman enjoys so much as doing all the things she doesn’t
like for the sake of some one she _does_ like. And the more
self-willed she is, the more she likes it.”

“I’m afraid I disagree with you. The boot is on the other leg as
a rule.” He spoke with a slight sneer.

“Exactly,” I cried eagerly. “And that’s why there are so many
unhappy marriages. It’s all the fault of the men. Either they give
way to their women—and then the women despise them, or else they
are utterly selfish, insist on their own way and never say ‘thank
you.’ Successful husbands make their wives do just what they want,
and then make a frightful fuss of them for doing it. Women like to
be mastered, but they hate not to have their sacrifices appreciated.
On the other hand, men don’t really appreciate women who are nice
to them all the time. When I am married, I shall be a devil most
of the time, but every now and then, when my husband least expects
it, I shall show him what a perfect angel I can be!”

Harry laughed outright.

“What a cat and dog life you will lead.”

“Lovers always fight,” I assured him. “Because they don’t understand
each other. And by the time they do understand each other they
aren’t in love any more.”

“Does the reverse hold true? Are people who fight each other always
lovers?”

“I—I don’t know,” I said, momentarily confused.

He turned away to the fireplace.

“Like some more soup?” he asked in a casual tone.

“Yes, please. I’m so hungry that I could eat a hippopotamus.”

“That’s good.”

He busied himself with the fire; I watched.

“When I can get off the couch, I’ll cook for you,” I promised.

“I don’t suppose you know anything about cooking.”

“I can warm up things out of tins as well as you can,” I retorted,
pointing to a row of tins on the mantelpiece.

_“Touché,”_ he said, and laughed.

His whole face changed when he laughed. It became boyish, happy—a
different personality.

I enjoyed my soup. As I ate it I reminded him that he had not,
after all, tendered me his advice.

“Ah, yes, what I was going to say was this. If I were you I would
stay quietly _perdu_ here until you are quite strong again. Your
enemies will believe you dead. They will hardly be surprised at
not finding the body. It would have been dashed to pieces on the
rocks and carried down with the torrent.”

I shivered.

“Once you are completely restored to health, you can journey
quietly on to Beira and get a boat to take you back to England.”

“That would be very tame,” I objected scornfully.

“There speaks a foolish schoolgirl.”

“I’m not a foolish schoolgirl,” I cried indignantly. “I’m a woman.”

He looked at me with an expression I could not fathom as I sat up
flushed and excited.

“God help me, so you are,” he muttered, and went abruptly out.

My recovery was rapid. The two injuries I had sustained were a
knock on the head and a badly wrenched arm. The latter was the most
serious and, to begin with, my rescuer had believed it to be
actually broken. A careful examination, however, convinced him that
it was not so, and although it was very painful I was recovering
the use of it quite quickly.

It was a strange time. We were cut off from the world, alone
together as Adam and Eve might have been—but with what a difference!
Old Batani hovered about counting no more than a dog might have
done. I insisted on doing the cooking, or as much of it as I could
manage with one arm. Harry was out a good part of the time, but we
spent long hours together lying out in the shade of the palms,
talking and quarrelling—discussing everything under high heaven,
quarrelling and making it up again. We bickered a good deal, but
there grew up between us a real and lasting comradeship such as I
could never have believed possible. That—and something else.

The time was drawing near, I knew it, when I should be well enough
to leave and I realized it with a heavy heart. Was he going to let
me go? Without a word? Without a sign? He had fits of silence, long
moody intervals, moments when he would spring up and tramp off by
himself. One evening the crisis came. We had finished our simple
meal and were sitting in the doorway of the hut. The sun was
sinking.

Hairpins were necessities of life with which Harry had not been
able to provide me, and my hair, straight and black, hung to my
knees. I sat, my chin on my hands, lost in meditation. I felt
rather than saw Harry looking at me.

“You look like a witch, Anne,” he said at last, and there was
something in his voice that had never been there before.

He reached out his hand and just touched my hair. I shivered.
Suddenly he sprang up with an oath.

“You must leave here to-morrow, do you hear?” he cried. “I—I can’t
bear any more. I’m only a man after all. You must go, Anne. You
must. You’re not a fool. You know yourself that this can’t go on.”

“I suppose not,” I said slowly. “But—it’s been happy, hasn’t it?”

“Happy? It’s been hell!”

“As bad as that!”

“What do you torment me for? Why are you mocking at me? Why do you
say that—laughing into your hair?”

“I wasn’t laughing. And I’m not mocking. If you want me to go, I’ll
go. But if you want me to stay—I’ll stay.”

“Not that!” he cried vehemently. “Not that. Don’t tempt me, Anne.
Do you realize what I am? A criminal twice over. A man hunted down.
They know me here as Harry Parker—they think I’ve been away on a
trek up country, but any day they may put two and two together—and
then the blow will fall. You’re so young, Anne, and so beautiful—with
the kind of beauty that sends men mad. All the world’s before
you—love, life, everything. Mine’s behind me—scorched, spoiled,
with a taste of bitter ashes.”

“If you don’t want me——”

“You know I want you. You know that I’d give my soul to pick you
up in my arms and keep you here, hidden away from the world, for
ever and ever. And you’re tempting me, Anne. You, with your long
witch’s hair, and your eyes that are golden and brown and green
and never stop laughing even when your mouth is grave. But I’ll
save you from yourself and from me. You shall go to-night. You
shall go to Beira——”

“I’m not going to Beira,” I interrupted.

“You are. You shall go to Beira if I have to take you there myself
and throw you on to the boat. What do you think I’m made of? Do
you think I’ll wake up night after night, fearing they’ve got you?
One can’t go on counting on miracles happening. You must go back
to England, Anne—and—and marry and be happy.”

“With a steady man who’ll give me a good home!”

“Better that than—utter disaster.”

“And what of you?”

His face grew grim and set.

“I’ve got my work ready to hand. Don’t ask what it is. You can
guess, I dare say. But I’ll tell you this—I’ll clear my name, or
die in the attempt, and I’ll choke the life out of the damned
scoundrel who did his best to murder you the other night.”

“We must be fair,” I said. “He didn’t actually push me over.”

“He’d no need to. His plan was cleverer than that. I went up to
the path afterwards. Everything looked all right, but by the marks
on the ground I saw that the stones which outline the path had been
taken up and put down again in a slightly different place. There
are tall bushes growing just over the edge. He’d balanced the
outside stones on them, so that you’d think you were still on the
path when in reality you were stepping into nothingness. God help
him if I lay my hands upon him!”

He paused a minute and then said in a totally different tone:

“We’ve never spoken of these things, Anne, have we? But the time’s
come. I want you to hear the whole story—from the beginning.”

“If it hurts you to go over the past, don’t tell me,” I said in a
low voice.

“But I want you to know. I never thought I should speak of that
part of my life to any one. Funny, isn’t it, the tricks Fate
plays?”

He was silent for a minute or two. The sun had set, and the velvety
darkness of the African night was enveloping us like a mantle.

“Some of it I know,” I said gently.

“What do you know?”

“I know that your real name is Harry Lucas.”

Still he hesitated—not looking at me, but staring straight out in
front of him. I had no clue as to what was passing in his mind,
but at last he jerked his head forward as though acquiescing in
some unspoken decision of his own and began his story.




  CHAPTER XXVI


“You are right. My real name is Harry Lucas. My father was a
retired soldier who came out to farm in Rhodesia. He died when I
was in my second year at Cambridge.”

“Were you fond of him?” I asked suddenly.

“I—don’t know.”

Then he flushed and went on with sudden vehemence:

“Why do I say that? I _did_ love my father. We said bitter things
to each other the last time I saw him, and we had many rows over
my wildness and my debts, but I cared for the old man. I know how
much now—when it’s too late,” he continued more quietly. “It was
at Cambridge that I met the other fellow——”

“Young Eardsley?”

“Yes—young Eardsley. His father, as you know, was one of South
Africa’s most prominent men. We drifted together at once, my friend
and I. We had our love of South Africa in common and we both had
a taste for the untrodden places of the world. After he left
Cambridge, Eardsley had a final quarrel with his father. The old
man had paid his debts twice, he refused to do so again. There was
a bitter scene between them. Sir Laurence declared himself at the
end of his patience—he would do no more for his son. He must stand
on his own legs for a while. The result was, as you know, that
those two young men went off to South America together, prospecting
for diamonds. I’m not going into that now, but we had a wonderful
time out there. Hardships in plenty, you understand, but it was a
good life—a hand-to-mouth scramble for existence far from the
beaten track—and, my God! that’s the place to know a friend. There
was a bond forged between us two out there that only death could
have broken. Well, as Colonel Race told you, our efforts were
crowned with success. We found a second Kimberley in the heart of
the British Guiana jungles. I can’t tell you our elation. It wasn’t
so much the actual value in money of the find—you see, Eardsley
was used to money, and he knew that when his father died he would
be a millionaire, and Lucas had always been poor and was used to
it. No, it was the sheer delight of discovery.”

He paused, and then added, almost apologetically:

“You don’t mind my telling it this way, do you? As though I wasn’t
in it at all. It seems like that now when I look back and see those
two boys. I almost forget that one of them was—Harry Rayburn.”

“Tell it any way you like,” I said, and he went on:

“We came to Kimberley—very cock-a-hoop over our find. We brought
a magnificent selection of diamonds with us to submit to the
experts. And then—in the hotel at Kimberley—we met her——”

I stiffened a little, and the hand that rested on the doorpost
clenched itself involuntarily.

“Anita Grünberg—that was her name. She was an actress. Quite young
and very beautiful. She was South African born, but her mother was
a Hungarian, I believe. There was some sort of mystery about her,
and that, of course, heightened her attraction for two boys home
from the wilds. She must have had an easy task. We both fell for
her right away, and we both took it hard. It was the first shadow
that had ever come between us—but even then it didn’t weaken our
friendship. Each of us, I honestly believe, was willing to stand
aside for the other to go in and win. But that wasn’t her game.
Sometimes, afterwards, I wondered why it hadn’t been, for Sir
Laurence Eardsley’s only son was quite a _parti._ But the truth of
it was that she was married—to a sorter in De Beers’—though nobody
knew of it. She pretended enormous interests in our discovery, and
we told her all about it and even showed her the diamonds.
Delilah—that’s what she should have been called—and she played her
part well!

“The De Beers robbery was discovered, and like a thunderclap the
police came down upon us. They seized our diamonds. We only laughed
at first—the whole thing was so absurd. And then the diamonds were
produced in court—and without question they were the stones stolen
from De Beers’. Anita Grünberg had disappeared. She had effected
the substitution neatly enough, and our story that these were not
the stones originally in our possession was laughed to scorn.

“Sir Laurence Eardsley had enormous influence. He succeeded in
getting the case dismissed—but it left two young men ruined and
disgraced to face the world with the stigma of thief attached to
their names, and it pretty well broke the old fellow’s heart. He
had one bitter interview with his son in which he heaped upon him
every reproach imaginable. He had done what he could to save the
family name, but from that day on his son was his son no longer.
He cast him off utterly. And the boy, like the proud young fool
that he was, remained silent, disdaining to protest his innocence
in the face of his father’s disbelief. He came out furious from
the interview—his friend was waiting for him. A week later war was
declared. The two friends enlisted together. You know what happened.
The best pal a man ever had was killed, partly through his own mad
recklessness in rushing into unnecessary danger. He died with his
name tarnished. . . .

“I swear to you, Anne, that it was mainly on his account that I
was so bitter against that woman. It had gone deeper with him than
with me. I had been madly in love with her for the moment—I even
think that I frightened her sometimes—but with him it was a quieter
and deeper feeling. She had been the very centre of his universe—and
her betrayal of him tore up the very roots of life. The blow
stunned him and left him paralyzed.”

Harry paused. After a minute or two he went on:

“As you know, I was reported ‘Missing, presumed killed.’ I never
troubled to correct the mistake. I took the name of Parker and came
to this island, which I knew of old. At the beginning of the war,
I had had ambitious hopes of proving my innocence, but now all that
spirit seemed dead. All I felt was, ‘What’s the good?’ My pal was
dead, neither he nor I had any living relations who would care. I
was supposed to be dead too, let it remain at that. I led a peaceful
existence here, neither happy nor unhappy—numbed of all feeling.
I see now, though I did not realize it at the time, that that was
partly the effect of the war.

“And then one day something occurred to wake me right up again. I
was taking a party of people in my boat on a trip up the river,
and I was standing at the landing-stage, helping them in, when one
of the men uttered a startled exclamation. It focused my attention
on him. He was a small, thin man with a beard, and he was staring
at me for all he was worth as though I was a ghost. So powerful
was his emotion that it awakened my curiosity. I made inquiries
about him at the hotel and learned that his name was Carton, that
he came from Kimberley, and that he was a diamond-sorter employed
by De Beers’. In a minute all the old sense of wrong surged over
me again. I left the island and went to Kimberley.

“I could find out little more about him, however. In the end, I
decided that I must force an interview. I took my revolver with
me. In the brief glimpse I had had of him, I had realized that he
was a physical coward. No sooner were we face to face than I
recognized that he was afraid of me. I soon forced him to tell me
all he knew. He had engineered part of the robbery and Anita
Grünberg was his wife. He had once caught sight of both of us when
we were dining with her at the hotel, and, having read that I was
killed, my appearance in the flesh at the Falls had startled him
badly. He and Anita had married quite young, but she had soon
drifted away from him. She had got in with a bad lot, he told
me—and it was then for the first time that I heard of the ‘Colonel.’
Carton himself had never been mixed up in anything except this one
affair—so he solemnly assured me, and I was inclined to believe
him. He was emphatically not of the stuff of which successful
criminals are made.

“I still had the feeling that he was keeping back something. As a
test, I threatened to shoot him there and then, declaring that I
cared very little what became of me now. In a frenzy of terror he
poured out a further story. It seems that Anita Grünberg did not
quite trust the ‘Colonel.’ Whilst pretending to hand over to him
the stones she had taken from the hotel, she kept back some in her
own possession. Carton advised her, with his technical knowledge,
which to keep. If, at any time, these stones were produced, they
were of such colour and quality as to be readily identifiable, and
the experts at De Beers’ would admit at once that these stones had
never passed through their hands. In this way my story of a
substitution would be supported, my name would be cleared, and
suspicion would be diverted to the proper quarter. I gathered that,
contrary to his usual practice, the ‘Colonel’ himself had been
concerned in this affair, therefore Anita felt satisfied that she
had a real hold over him, should she need it. Carton now proposed
that I should make a bargain with Anita Grünberg, or Nadina, as
she now called herself. For a sufficient sum of money he thought
that she would be willing to give up the diamonds and betray her
former employer. He would cable to her immediately.

“I was still suspicious of Carton. He was a man whom it was easy
enough to frighten, but who, in his fright, would tell so many lies
that to sift the truth out from them would be no easy job. I went
back to the hotel and waited. By the following evening I judged
that he would have received the reply to his cable. I called round
at his house and was told that Mr. Carton was away, but would be
returning on the morrow. Instantly I became suspicious. In the nick
of time I found out that he was in reality sailing for England on
the _Kilmorden Castle,_ which left Cape Town in two days’ time. I
had just time to journey down and catch the same boat.

“I had no intention of alarming Carton by revealing my presence on
board. I had done a good deal of acting in my time at Cambridge,
and it was comparatively easy for me to transform myself into a
grave bearded gentleman of middle age. I avoided Carton carefully
on board the boat, keeping to my own cabin as far as possible under
the pretence of illness.

“I had no difficulty in trailing him when we got to London. He went
straight to an hotel and did not go out until the following day.
He left the hotel shortly before one o’clock. I was behind him. He
went straight to a house-agent in Knightsbridge. There he asked
for particulars of houses to let on the river.

“I was at the next table also inquiring about houses. Then suddenly
in walked Anita Grünberg, Nadina—whatever you like to call her.
Superb, insolent, and almost as beautiful as ever. God! how I hated
her. There she was, the woman who had ruined my life—and who had
also ruined a better life than mine. At that minute I could have
put my hands round her neck and squeezed the life out of her inch
by inch! Just for a minute or two I saw red. I hardly took in what
the agent was saying. It was her voice that I heard next, high and
clear, with an exaggerated foreign accent: ‘The Mill House, Marlow.
The property of Sir Eustace Pedler. That sounds as though it might
suit me. At any rate, I will go and see it.’

“The man wrote her an order, and she walked out again in her regal
insolent manner. Not by word or a sign had she recognized Carton,
yet I was sure that their meeting there was a preconceived plan.
Then I started to jump to conclusions. Not knowing that Sir Eustace
was at Cannes, I thought that this house-hunting business was a
mere pretext for meeting him in the Mill House. I knew that he had
been in South Africa at the time of the robbery, and never having
seen him I immediately leaped to the conclusion that he himself
was the mysterious ‘Colonel’ of whom I had heard so much.

“I followed my two suspects along Knightsbridge. Nadina went into
the Hyde Park Hotel. I quickened my pace and went in also. She
walked straight into the restaurant, and I decided that I would
not risk her recognizing me at the moment, but would continue to
follow Carton. I was in great hopes that he was going to get the
diamonds, and that by suddenly appearing and making myself known
to him when he least expected it I might startle the truth out of
him. I followed him down into the Tube station at Hyde Park Corner.
He was standing by himself at the end of the platform. There was
some girl standing near, but no one else. I decided that I would
accost him then and there. You know what happened. In the sudden
shock of seeing a man whom he imagined far away in South Africa,
he lost his head and stepped back upon the line. He was always a
coward. Under the pretext of being a doctor, I managed to search
his pockets. There was a wallet with some notes in it and one or
two unimportant letters, there was a roll of films—which I must
have dropped somewhere later—and there was a piece of paper with
an appointment made on it for the 22nd on the _Kilmorden_ Castle.
In my haste to get away before any one detained me, I dropped that
also, but fortunately I remembered the figures.

“I hurried to the nearest cloak-room and hastily removed my make-up.
I did not want to be laid by the heels for picking a dead man’s
pocket. Then I retraced my steps to the Hyde Park Hotel. Nadina
was still having lunch. I needn’t describe in detail how I followed
her down to Marlow. She went into the house, and I spoke to the
woman at the lodge, pretending that I was with her. Then I, too,
went in.”

He stopped. There was a tense silence.

“You will believe me, Anne, won’t you? I swear before God that what
I am going to say is true. I went into the house after her with
something very like murder in my heart—and she was dead! I found
her in that first-floor room—God! It was horrible. Dead—and I was
not more than three minutes behind her. And there was no sign of
any one else in the house! Of course I realized at once the terrible
position I was in. By one master-stroke the blackmailed had rid
himself of the blackmailer, and at the same time had provided a
victim to whom the crime would be ascribed. The hand of the
‘Colonel’ was very plain. For the second time I was to be his
victim. Fool that I had been to walk into the trap so easily.

“I hardly know what I did next. I managed to go out of the place
looking fairly normal, but I knew that it could not be long before
the crime was discovered and a description of my appearance
telegraphed all over the country.

“I lay low for some days, not daring to make a move. In the end
chance came to my aid. I overheard a conversation between two
middle-aged gentlemen in the street, one of whom proved to be Sir
Eustace Pedler. I at once conceived the idea of attaching myself
to him as his secretary. The fragment of conversation I had
overheard gave me my clue. I was now no longer so sure that Sir
Eustace Pedler was the ‘Colonel.’ His house might have been
appointed as a rendezvous by accident, or for some obscure motive
that I had not fathomed.”

“Do you know,” I interrupted, “that Guy Pagett was in Marlow at
the date of the murder?”

“That settles it then. I thought he was at Cannes with Sir Eustace.”

“He was supposed to be in Florence—but he certainly never went
_there._ I’m pretty certain he was really in Marlow, but of course
I can’t prove it.”

“And to think I never suspected Pagett for a minute until the night
he tried to throw you overboard. The man’s a marvellous actor.”

“Yes, isn’t he?”

“That explains why the Mill House was chosen. Pagett could probably
get in and out of it unobserved. Of course he made no objection to
my accompanying Sir Eustace across in the boat. He didn’t want me
laid by the heels immediately. You see, evidently Nadina didn’t
bring the jewels with her to the rendezvous as they had counted on
her doing. I fancy that Carton really had them and concealed them
somewhere on the _Kilmorden Castle_—that’s where he came in. They
hoped that I might have some clue as to where they were hidden. As
long as the ‘Colonel’ did not recover the diamonds, he was still
in danger—hence his anxiety to get them at all costs. Where the
devil Carton hid them—if he did hide them, I don’t know.”

“That’s another story,” I quoted. _“My_ story. And I’m going to
tell it you now.”




  CHAPTER XXVII


Harry listened attentively whilst I recounted all the events that
I have narrated in these pages. The thing that bewildered and
astonished him most was to find that all along the diamonds had
been in my possession—or rather in Suzanne’s. That was a fact he
had never suspected. Of course, after hearing his story, I realized
the point of Carton’s little arrangement—or rather Nadina’s, since
I had no doubt that it was her brain which had conceived the plan.
No surprise tactics executed against her or her husband could
result in the seizure of the diamonds. The secret was locked in
her own brain, and the “Colonel” was not likely to guess that they
had been entrusted to the keeping of an ocean steward!

Harry’s vindication from the old charge of theft seemed assured.
It was the other, graver charge that paralyzed all our activities.
For, as things stood, he could not come out in the open to prove
his case.

The one thing we came back to, again and again, was the identity
of the “Colonel.” Was he, or was he not, Guy Pagett?

“I should say he was but for one thing,” said Harry. “It seems
pretty much of a certainty that it was Pagett who murdered Anita
Grünberg at Marlow—and that certainly lends colour to the
supposition that he is actually the ‘Colonel,’ since Anita’s
business was not of the nature to be discussed with a subordinate.
No—the only thing that militates against that theory is the attempt
to put you out of the way on the night of your arrival here. You
saw Pagett left behind at Cape Town—by no possible means could he
have arrived here before the following Wednesday. He is unlikely
to have any emissaries in this part of the world, and all his plans
were laid to deal with you in Cape Town. He might, of course, have
cabled instructions to some lieutenant of his in Johannesburg, who
could have joined the Rhodesian train at Mafeking, but his
instructions would have had to be particularly definite to allow
of that note being written.”

We sat silent for a moment, then Harry went on slowly: “You say
that Mrs. Blair was asleep when you left the hotel and that you
heard Sir Eustace dictating to Miss Pettigrew? Where was Colonel
Race?”

“I could not find him anywhere.”

“Had he any reason to believe that—you and I might be friendly with
each other?”

“He might have had,” I answered thoughtfully, remembering our
conversation on the way back from the Matoppos. “He’s a very
powerful personality,” I continued, “but not at all my idea of the
‘Colonel.’ And, anyway, such an idea would be absurd. He’s in the
Secret Service.”

“How do we know that he is? It’s the easiest thing in the world to
throw out a hint of that kind. No one contradicts it, and the
rumour spreads until every one believes it as gospel truth. It
provides an excuse for all sorts of doubtful doings. Anne, do you
like Race?”

“I do—and I don’t. He repels me and at the same time fascinates
me; but I know one thing, I’m always a little afraid of him.”

“He was in South Africa, you know, at the time of the Kimberley
robbery,” said Harry slowly.

“But it was he who told Suzanne all about the ‘Colonel’ and how he
had been in Paris trying to get on his track.”

_“Camouflage_—of a particularly clever kind.”

“But where does Pagett come in? Is he in Race’s pay?”

“Perhaps,” said Harry slowly, “he doesn’t come in at all.”

“What?”

“Think back, Anne. Did you ever hear Pagett’s own account of that
night on the _Kilmorden?”_

“Yes—through Sir Eustace.”

I repeated it. Harry listened closely.

“He saw a man coming from the direction of Sir Eustace’s cabin and
followed him up on deck. Is that what he says? Now, who had the
cabin opposite to Sir Eustace? Colonel Race. Supposing Colonel Race
crept up on deck, and, foiled in his attack on you, fled round the
deck and met Pagett just coming through the saloon door. He knocks
him down and springs inside, closing the door. We dash round and
find Pagett lying there. How’s that?”

“You forget that he declares positively it was you who knocked him
down.”

“Well, suppose that just as he regains consciousness he sees me
disappearing in the distance? Wouldn’t he take it for granted that
I was his assailant? Especially as he thought all along it was I
he was following?”

“It’s possible, yes,” I said slowly. “But it alters all our ideas.
And there are other things.”

“Most of them are open to explanation. The man who followed you in
Cape Town spoke to Pagett, and Pagett looked at his watch. The man
might have merely asked him the time.”

“It was just a coincidence, you mean?”

“Not exactly. There’s a method in all this, connecting Pagett with
the affair. Why was the Mill House chosen for the murder? Was it
because Pagett had been in Kimberley when the diamonds were stolen?
Would _he_ have been made the scapegoat if I had not appeared so
providentially upon the scene?”

“Then you think he may be entirely innocent?”

“It looks like it, but, if so, we’ve got to find out what he was
doing in Marlow. If he’s got a reasonable explanation of that,
we’re on the right tack.”

He got up.

“It’s past midnight. Turn in, Anne, and get some sleep. Just before
dawn I’ll take you over in the boat. You must catch the train at
Livingstone. I’ve got a friend there who will keep you hidden away
until the train starts. You go to Bulawayo and catch the Beira
train there. I can find out from my friend in Livingstone what’s
going on at the hotel and where your friends are now.”

“Beira,” I said meditatively.

“Yes, Anne, it’s Beira for you. This is man’s work. Leave it to
me.”

We had had a momentary respite from emotion whilst we talked the
situation out, but it was on us again now. We did not even look at
each other.

“Very well,” I said, and passed into the hut.

I lay down on the skin-covered couch, but I didn’t sleep, and
outside I could hear Harry Rayburn pacing up and down, up and down
through the long dark hours. At last he called me:

“Come, Anne, it’s time to go.”

I got up and came out obediently. It was still quite dark, but I
knew that dawn was not far off.

“We’ll take the canoe, not the motor-boat——” Harry began, when
suddenly he stopped dead and held up his hand.

“Hush! What’s that?”

I listened, but could hear nothing. His ears were sharper than
mine, however, the ears of a man who has lived long in the
wilderness. Presently I heard it too—the faint splash of paddles
in the water coming from the direction of the right bank of the
river and rapidly approaching our little landing-stage.

We strained our eyes in the darkness, and could make out a dark
blur on the surface of the water. It was a boat. Then there was a
momentary spurt of flame. Some one had struck a match. By its light
I recognized one figure, the red-bearded Dutchman of the villa at
Muizenberg. The others were natives.

“Quick—back to the hut.”

Harry swept me back with him. He took down a couple of rifles and
a revolver from the wall.

“Can you load a rifle?”

“I never have. Show me how.”

I grasped his instructions well enough. We closed the door and
Harry stood by the window which overlooked the landing-stage. The
boat was just about to run alongside it.

“Who’s that?” called out Harry in a ringing voice.

Any doubt we might have had as to our visitors’ intentions was
swiftly resolved. A hail of bullets splattered round us. Fortunately
neither of us was hit. Harry raised the rifle. It spat murderously,
and again and again. I heard two groans and a splash.

“That’s given ’em something to think about,” he muttered grimly,
as he reached for the second rifle. “Stand well back, Anne, for
God’s sake. And load quickly.”

More bullets. One just grazed Harry’s cheek. His answering fire
was more deadly than theirs. I had the rifle reloaded when he
turned for it. He caught me close with his left arm and kissed me
once savagely before he turned to the window again. Suddenly he
uttered a shout.

“They’re going—had enough of it. They’re a good mark out there on
the water, and they can’t see how many of us there are. They’re
routed for the moment—but they’ll come back. We’ll have to get
ready for them.” He flung down the rifle and turned to me.

“Anne! You beauty! You wonder! You little queen! As brave as a
lion. Black-haired witch!”

He caught me in his arms. He kissed my hair, my eyes, my mouth.

“And now to business,” he said, suddenly releasing me. “Get out
those tins of paraffin.”

I did as I was told. He was busy inside the hut. Presently I saw
him on the roof of the hut, crawling along with something in his
arms. He rejoined me in a minute or two.

“Go down to the boat. We’ll have to carry it across the island to
the other side.”

He picked up the paraffin as I disappeared.

“They’re coming back,” I called softly. I had seen the blur moving
out from the opposite shore.

He ran down to me.

“Just in time. Why—where the hell’s the boat?” Both had been cut
adrift. Harry whistled softly. “We’re in a tight place, honey.
Mind?”

“Not with you.”

“Ah, but dying together’s not much fun. We’ll do better than that.
See—they’ve got two boat-loads this time. Going to land at two
different points. Now for my little scenic effect.”

Almost as he spoke a long flame shot up from the hut. Its light
illuminated two crouching figures huddled together on the roof.

“My old clothes—stuffed with rags—but they won’t tumble to it for
some time. Come, Anne, we’ve got to try desperate means.”

Hand in hand, we raced across the island. Only a narrow channel of
water divided it from the shore on that side.

“We’ve got to swim for it. Can you swim at all, Anne? Not that it
matters. I can get you across. It’s the wrong side for a boat——too
many rocks, but the right side for swimming, and the right side
for Livingstone.”

“I can swim a little—farther than that. What’s the danger, Harry?”
For I had seen the grim look on his face. “Sharks?”

“No, you little goose. Sharks live in the sea. But you’re sharp,
Anne. Crocs, that’s the trouble.”

“Crocodiles?”

“Yes, don’t think of them—or say your prayers, whichever you feel
inclined.”

We plunged in. My prayers must have been efficacious, for we
reached the shore without adventure, and drew ourselves up wet and
dripping on the bank.

“Now for Livingstone. It’s rough going, I’m afraid, and wet clothes
won’t make it any better. But it’s got to be done.”

That walk was a nightmare. My wet skirts flapped round my legs,
and my stockings were soon torn off by the thorns. Finally I
stopped, utterly exhausted. Harry came back to me.

“Hold up, honey. I’ll carry you for a bit.”

That was the way I came into Livingstone, slung across his shoulder
like a sack of coals. How he did it for all that way, I don’t know.
The first faint light of dawn was just breaking. Harry’s friend
was a young man of twenty odd who kept a store of native curios.
His name was Ned—perhaps he had another, but I never heard it. He
didn’t seem in the least surprised to see Harry walk in, dripping
wet, holding an equally dripping female by the hand. Men are very
wonderful.

He gave us food to eat, and hot coffee, and got our clothes dried
for us whilst we rolled ourselves in Manchester blankets of gaudy
hue. In the tiny back room of the hut we were safe from observation
whilst he departed to make judicious inquiries as to what had
become of Sir Eustace’s party, and whether any of them were still
at the hotel.

It was then that I informed Harry that nothing would induce me to
go to Beira. I never meant to, anyway, but now all reason for such
proceedings had vanished. The point of the plan had been that my
enemies believed me dead. Now that they knew I wasn’t dead, my
going to Beira would do no good whatever. They could easily follow
me there and murder me quietly. I should have no one to protect
me. It was finally arranged that I should join Suzanne, wherever
she was, and devote all my energies to taking care of myself. On
no account was I to seek adventures or endeavour to checkmate the
“Colonel.”

I was to remain quietly with her and await instructions from Harry.
The diamonds were to be deposited in the Bank at Kimberley under
the name of Parker.

“There’s one thing,” I said thoughtfully, “we ought to have a code
of some kind. We don’t want to be hoodwinked again by messages
purporting to come from one to the other.”

“That’s easy enough. Any message that comes _genuinely_ from me
will have the word ‘and’ crossed out in it.”

“Without trade-mark, none genuine,” I murmured. “What about wires?”

“Any wires from me will be signed ‘Andy.’”

“Train will be in before long, Harry,” said Ned, putting his head
in and withdrawing it immediately.

I stood up.

“And shall I marry a nice steady man if I find one?” I asked
demurely.

Harry came close to me.

“My God! Anne, if you ever marry any one else but me, I’ll wring
his neck. And as for you——”

“Yes,” I said, pleasurably excited.

“I shall carry you away and beat you black and blue!”

“What a delightful husband I have chosen,” I said satirically. “And
doesn’t he change his mind overnight!”




  CHAPTER XXVIII


_(Extract from the diary of Sir Eustace Pedler)_


As I remarked once before, I am essentially a man of peace. I yearn
for a quiet life—and that’s just the one thing I don’t seem able
to have. I am always in the middle of storms and alarms. The relief
of getting away from Pagett with his incessant nosing out of
intrigues was enormous, and Miss Pettigrew is certainly a useful
creature. Although there is nothing of the houri about her, one or
two of her accomplishments are invaluable. It is true that I had
a touch of liver at Bulawayo and behaved like a bear in consequence,
but I had had a disturbed night in the train. At 3 a.m. an
exquisitely dressed young man looking like a musical-comedy hero
of the Wild West entered my compartment and asked where I was
going. Disregarding my first murmur of “Tea—and for God’s sake
don’t put sugar in it,” he repeated his question, laying stress on
the fact that he was not a waiter but an Immigration officer. I
finally succeeded in satisfying him that I was suffering from no
infectious disease, that I was visiting Rhodesia from the purest
of motives, and further gratified him with my full Christian names
and my place of birth. I then endeavoured to snatch a little sleep,
but some officious ass aroused me at 5.30 with a cup of liquid
sugar which he called tea. I don’t think I threw it at him, but I
know that that was what I wanted to do. He brought me unsugared
tea, stone cold, at 6, and I then fell asleep utterly exhausted,
to awaken just outside Bulawayo and be landed with a beastly wooden
giraffe, all legs and neck!

But for these small contretemps, all had been going smoothly. And
then fresh calamity befell.

It was the night of our arrival at the Falls. I was dictating to
Miss Pettigrew in my sitting-room, when suddenly Mrs. Blair burst
in without a word of excuse and wearing most compromising attire.

“Where’s Anne?” she cried.

A nice question to ask. As though I were responsible for the girl.
What did she expect Miss Pettigrew to think? That I was in the
habit of producing Anne Beddingfeld from my pocket at midnight or
thereabouts? Very compromising for a man in my position.

“I presume,” I said coldly, “that she is in her bed.”

I cleared my throat and glanced at Miss Pettigrew, to show that I
was ready to resume dictating. I hoped Mrs. Blair would take the
hint. She did nothing of the kind. Instead she sank into a chair
and waved a slippered foot in an agitated manner.

“She’s not in her room. I’ve been there. I had a dream—a terrible
dream—that she was in some awful danger, and I got up and went to
her room, just to reassure myself, you know. She wasn’t there and
her bed hadn’t been slept in.”

She looked at me appealingly.

“What shall I do, Sir Eustace?”

Repressing the desire to reply, “Go to bed, and don’t worry over
nothing. An able-bodied young woman like Anne Beddingfeld is
perfectly well able to take care of herself,” I frowned judicially.

“What does Race say about it?”

Why should Race have it all his own way? Let him have some of the
disadvantages as well as the advantages of female society.

“I can’t find him anywhere.”

She was evidently making a night of it. I sighed and sat down in
a chair.

“I don’t quite see the reason for your agitation,” I said patiently.

“My dream——”

“That curry we had for dinner!”

“Oh, Sir Eustace!”

The woman was quite indignant. And yet everybody knows that
nightmares are a direct result of injudicious eating.

“After all,” I continued persuasively, “why shouldn’t Anne
Beddingfeld and Race go out for a little stroll without having the
whole hotel aroused about it?”

“You think they’ve just gone out for a stroll together? But it’s
after midnight!”

“One does these foolish things when one is young,” I murmured,
“though Race is certainly old enough to know better.”

“Do you really think so?”

“I dare say they’ve run away to make a match of it,” I continued
soothingly, though fully aware that I was making an idiotic
suggestion. For, after all, at a place like this, where is there
to run away to?

I don’t know how much longer I should have gone on making feeble
remarks, but at that moment Race himself walked in upon us. At any
rate, I had been partly right—_he_ had been out for a stroll, but
he hadn’t taken Anne with him. However, I had been quite wrong in
my way of dealing with the situation. I was soon shown that. Race
had the whole hotel turned upside-down in three minutes. I’ve never
seen a man more upset.

The thing is very extraordinary. Where did the girl go? She walked
out of the hotel, fully dressed, about ten minutes past eleven,
and she was never seen again. The idea of suicide seems impossible.
She was one of those energetic young women who are in love with
life, and have not the faintest intention of quitting it. There
was no train either way until midday on the morrow, so she can’t
have left the place. Then where the devil is she?

Race is almost beside himself, poor fellow. He has left no stone
unturned. All the D.C.’s, or whatever they call themselves, for
hundreds of miles round have been pressed into the service. The
native trackers have run about on all fours. Everything that can
be done is being done—but no sign of Anne Beddingfeld. The accepted
theory is that she walked in her sleep. There are signs on the path
near the bridge which seem to show that the girl walked deliberately
off the edge. If so, of course, she must have been dashed to pieces
on the rocks below. Unfortunately, most of the footprints were
obliterated by a party of tourists who chose to walk that way early
on the Monday morning.

I don’t know that it’s a very satisfactory theory. In my young
days, I always was told that sleep-walkers couldn’t hurt
themselves—that their own sixth sense took care of them. I don’t
think the theory satisfies Mrs. Blair either.

I can’t make that woman out. Her whole attitude towards Race has
changed. She watches him now like a cat a mouse, and she makes
obvious efforts to bring herself to be civil to him. And they used
to be such friends. Altogether she is unlike herself, nervous,
hysterical, starting and jumping at the least sound. I am beginning
to think that it is high time I went to Jo’burg.

A rumour came along yesterday of a mysterious island somewhere up
the river, with a man and a girl on it. Race got very excited. It
turned out to be all a mare’s-nest, however. The man had been there
for years, and is well known to the manager of the hotel. He totes
parties up and down the river in the season and points out
crocodiles and a stray hippopotamus or so to them. I believe that
he keeps a tame one which is trained to bite pieces out of the boat
on occasions. Then he fends it off with a boat-hook, and the party
feel they have really got to the back of beyond at last. How long
the girl has been there is not definitely known, but it seems
pretty clear that she can’t be Anne, and there is a certain delicacy
in interfering in other people’s affairs. If I were this young
fellow, I should certainly kick Race off the island if he came
asking questions about my love affairs.

_Later._

It is definitely settled that I go to Jo’burg to-morrow. Race urges
me to do so. Things are getting unpleasant there, by all I hear,
but I might as well go before they get worse. I dare say I shall
be shot by a striker, anyway. Mrs. Blair was to have accompanied
me, but at the last minute she changed her mind and decided to stay
on at the Falls. It seems as though she couldn’t bear to take her
eyes off Race. She came to me to-night and said, with some
hesitation, that she had a favour to ask. Would I take charge of
her souvenirs for her?

“Not the animals?” I asked, in lively alarm. I always felt that I
should get stuck with those beastly animals sooner or later.

In the end we effected a compromise. I took charge of two small
wooden boxes for her which contained fragile articles. The animals
are to be packed by the local store in vast crates and sent to Cape
Town by rail, where Pagett will see to their being stored.

The people who are packing them say that they are of a particularly
awkward shape (!), and that special cases will have to be made. I
pointed out to Mrs. Blair that by the time she has got them home
those animals will have cost her easily a pound apiece!

Pagett is straining at the leash to rejoin me in Jo’burg. I shall
make an excuse of Mrs. Blair’s cases to keep him in Cape Town. I
have written him that he must receive the cases and see to their
safe disposal, as they contain rare curios of immense value.

So all is settled, and I and Miss Pettigrew go off into the blue
together. And any one who has seen Miss Pettigrew will admit that
it is perfectly respectable.




  CHAPTER XXIX


  Johannesburg,

  _March 6th._

There is something about the state of things here that is not at
all healthy. To use the well-known phrase that I have so often
read, we are all living on the edge of a volcano. Bands of strikers,
or so-called strikers, patrol the streets and scowl at one in a
murderous fashion. They are picking out the bloated capitalists
ready for when the massacres begin, I suppose. You can’t ride in
a taxi—if you do, strikers pull you out again. And the hotels hint
pleasantly that when the food gives out they will fling you out on
the mat!

I met Reeves, my labour friend of the _Kilmorden,_ last night. He
has cold feet worse than any man I ever saw. He’s like all the rest
of these people, they make inflammatory speeches of enormous
length, solely for political purposes, and then wish they hadn’t.
He’s busy now going about and saying he didn’t really do it. When
I met him, he was just off to Cape Town, where he meditates making
a three days’ speech in Dutch, vindicating himself, and pointing
out that the things he said really meant something entirely
different. I am thankful that I do not have to sit in the
Legislative Assembly of South Africa. The House of Commons is bad
enough, but at least we have only one language, and some slight
restriction as to length of speeches. When I went to the Assembly
before leaving Cape Town, I listened to a gray-haired gentleman
with a drooping moustache who looked exactly like the Mock Turtle
in _Alice in Wonderland._

He dropped out his words one by one in a particularly melancholy
fashion. Every now and then he galvanized himself to further
efforts by ejaculating something that sounded like “Platt Skeet,”
uttered _fortissimo_ and in marked contrast to the rest of his
delivery. When he did this, half his audience yelled “Whoof,
whoof!” which is possibly Dutch for “Hear, hear,” and the other
half woke up with a start from the pleasant nap they had been
having. I was given to understand that the gentleman had been
speaking for at least three days. They must have a lot of patience
in South Africa.

I have invented endless jobs to keep Pagett in Cape Town, but at
last the fertility of my imagination has given out, and he joins
me to-morrow in the spirit of the faithful dog who comes to die by
his master’s side. And I was getting on so well with my Reminiscences
too! I had invented some extraordinarily witty things that the
strike leaders said to me and I said to the strike leaders.

This morning I was interviewed by a Government official. He was
urbane, persuasive and mysterious in turn. To begin with, he
alluded to my exalted position and importance and suggested that
I should remove myself, or be removed by him, to Pretoria.

“You expect trouble, then?” I asked.

His reply was so worded as to have no meaning whatsoever, so I
gathered that they were expecting serious trouble. I suggested to
him that his Government were letting things go rather far.

“There is such a thing as giving a man enough rope, and letting
him hang himself, Sir Eustace.”

“Oh, quite so, quite so.”

“It is not the strikers themselves who are causing the trouble.
There is some organization at work behind them. Arms and explosives
have been pouring in, and we have made a haul of certain documents
which throw a good deal of light on the methods adopted to import
them. There is a regular code. Potatoes mean ‘detonators,’
cauliflower, ‘rifles,’ other vegetables stand for various
explosives.”

“That’s very interesting,” I commended.

“More than that, Sir Eustace, we have every reason to believe that
the man who runs the whole show, the directing genius of the
affair, is at this minute in Johannesburg.”

He stared at me so hard that I began to fear that he suspected me
of being the man. I broke out into a cold perspiration at the
thought, and began to regret that I had ever conceived the idea of
inspecting a miniature revolution at first hand.

“No trains are running from Jo’burg to Pretoria,” he continued.
“But I can arrange to send you over by private car. In case you
should be stopped on the way I can provide you with two separate
passes, one issued by the Union Government, and the other stating
that you are an English visitor who has nothing whatsoever to do
with the Union.”

“One for your people, and one for the strikers, eh?”

“Exactly.”

The project did not appeal to me—I know what happens in a case of
that kind. You get flustered and mix the things up. I should hand
the wrong pass to the wrong person, and it would end in my being
summarily shot by a bloodthirsty rebel, or one of the supporters
of law and order whom I notice guarding the streets wearing bowler
hats and smoking pipes, with rifles tucked carelessly under their
arms. Besides, what should I do with myself in Pretoria? Admire
the architecture of the Union buildings and listen to the echoes
of the shooting round Johannesburg? I should be penned up there
God knows how long. They’ve blown up the railway line already, I
hear. It isn’t even as if one could get a drink there. They put
the place under martial law two days ago.

“My dear fellow,” I said, “you don’t seem to realize that I’m
studying conditions on the Rand. How the devil am I going to study
them from Pretoria? I appreciate your care for my safety, but don’t
you worry about me. I shall be all right.”

“I warn you, Sir Eustace, that the food question is already
serious.”

“A little fasting will improve my figure,” I said, with a sigh.

We were interrupted by a telegram being handed to me. I read it
with amazement:

“Anne is safe. Here with me at Kimberley. Suzanne Blair.”

I don’t think I ever really believed in the annihilation of Anne.
There is something peculiarly indestructible about that young
woman—she is like the patent balls that one gives to terriers. She
has an extraordinary knack of turning up smiling. I still don’t
see why it was necessary for her to walk out of the hotel in the
middle of the night in order to get to Kimberley. There was no
train, anyway. She must have put on a pair of angel’s wings and
flown there. And I don’t suppose she will ever explain. Nobody
does—to me. I always have to guess. It becomes monotonous after a
while. The exigencies of journalism are at the bottom of it, I
suppose. “How I shot the rapids,” by our Special Correspondent.

I refolded the telegram and got rid of my Governmental friend. I
don’t like the prospect of being hungry, but I’m not alarmed for
my personal safety. Smuts is perfectly capable of dealing with the
revolution. But I would give a considerable sum of money for a
drink! I wonder if Pagett will have the sense to bring a bottle of
whisky with him when he arrives to-morrow?

I put on my hat and went out, intending to buy a few souvenirs.
The curio-shops in Jo’burg are rather pleasant. I was just studying
a window full of imposing karosses, when a man coming out of the
shop cannoned into me. To my surprise it turned out to be Race.

I can’t flatter myself that he looked pleased to see me. As a
matter of fact, he looked distinctly annoyed, but I insisted on
his accompanying me back to the hotel. I get tired of having no
one but Miss Pettigrew to talk to.

“I had no idea you were in Jo’burg,” I said chattily. “When did
you arrive?”

“Last night.”

“Where are you staying?”

“With friends.”

He was disposed to be extraordinarily taciturn, and seemed to be
embarrassed by my questions.

“I hope they keep poultry,” I remarked. “A diet of new-laid eggs
and the occasional slaughtering of an old cock will be decidedly
agreeable soon from all I hear.”

“By the way,” I said, when we were back in the hotel, “have you
heard that Miss Beddingfeld is alive and kicking?”

He nodded.

“She gave us quite a fright,” I said airily. “Where the devil did
she go to that night, that’s what I’d like to know.”

“She was on the island all the time.”

“Which island? Not the one with the young man on it?”

“Yes.”

“How very improper,” I said. “Pagett will be quite shocked. He
always did disapprove of Anne Beddingfeld. I suppose that was the
young man she originally intended to meet in Durban?”

“I don’t think so.”

“Don’t tell me anything you don’t want to,” I said, by way of
encouraging him.

“I fancy that this is a young man we should all be very glad to
lay our hands on.”

“Not——?” I cried, in rising excitement.

He nodded.

“Harry Rayburn, _alias_ Harry Lucas—that’s his real name, you know.
He’s given us all the slip once more, but we’re bound to rope him
in soon.”

“Dear me, dear me,” I murmured.

“We don’t suspect the girl of complicity in any case. On her side
it’s—just a love-affair.”

I always did think Race was in love with Anne. The way he said
those last words made me feel sure of it.

“She’s gone to Beira,” he continued rather hastily.

“Indeed,” I said, staring. “How do you know?”

“She wrote to me from Bulawayo, telling me she was going home that
way. The best thing she can do, poor child.”

“Somehow, I don’t fancy she is in Beira,” I said meditatively.

“She was just starting when she wrote.”

I was puzzled. Somebody was clearly lying. Without stopping to
reflect that Anne might have excellent reasons for her misleading
statements, I gave myself up to the pleasure of scoring off Race.
He is always so cocksure. I took the telegram from my pocket and
handed it to him.

“Then how do you explain this?” I asked nonchalantly.

He seemed dumbfounded.

“She said she was just starting for Beira,” he said, in a dazed
voice.

I know that Race is supposed to be clever. He is, in my opinion,
rather a stupid man. It never seemed to occur to him that girls do
not always tell the truth.

“Kimberley too. What are they doing there?” he muttered.

“Yes, that surprised me. I should have thought Miss Anne would have
been in the thick of it here, gathering copy for the _Daily
Budget.”_

“Kimberley,” he said again. The place seemed to upset him. “There’s
nothing to see there—the pits aren’t being worked.”

“You know what women are,” I said vaguely.

He shook his head and went off. I have evidently given him something
to think about.

No sooner had he departed than my Government official reappeared.

“I hope you will forgive me for troubling you again, Sir Eustace,”
he apologized. “But there are one or two questions I should like
to ask you.”

“Certainly, my dear fellow,” I said cheerfully. “Ask away.”

“It concerns your secretary——”

“I know nothing about him,” I said hastily. “He foisted himself
upon me in London, robbed me of valuable papers—for which I shall
be hauled over the coals—and disappeared like a conjuring trick at
Cape Town. It’s true that I was at the Falls at the same time as
he was, but I was at the hotel, and he was on an island. I can
assure you that I never set eyes upon him the whole time that I
was there.”

I paused for breath.

“You misunderstand me. It was of your other secretary that I
spoke.”

“What? Pagett?” I cried, in lively astonishment. “He’s been with
me eight years—a most trustworthy fellow.”

My interlocutor smiled.

“We are still at cross-purposes. I refer to the lady.”

“Miss Pettigrew?” I exclaimed.

“Yes. She has been seen coming out of Agrasato’s Native Curio-shop.”

“God bless my soul!” I interrupted. “I was going into that place
myself this afternoon. You might have caught _me_ coming out!”

There doesn’t seem to be any innocent thing that one can do in
Jo’burg without being suspected for it.

“Ah! but she has been there more than once—and in rather doubtful
circumstances. I may as well tell you—in confidence, Sir Eustace—that
the place is suspected of being a well-known rendezvous used by
the secret organization behind this revolution. That is why I
should be glad to hear all that you can tell me about this lady.
Where and how did you come to engage her?”

“She was lent to me,” I replied coldly, “by your own Government.”

He collapsed utterly.




  CHAPTER XXX


_(Anne’s Narrative Resumed)_


As soon as I got to Kimberley I wired to Suzanne.

She joined me there with the utmost dispatch, heralding her arrival
with telegrams sent off _en route._ I was awfully surprised to find
that she really was fond of me—I thought I had been just a new
sensation, but she positively fell on my neck and wept when we met.

When we had recovered from our emotion a little, I sat down on the
bed and told her the whole story from A to Z.

“You always did suspect Colonel Race,” she said thoughtfully, when
I had finished. “I didn’t until the night you disappeared. I liked
him so much all along and thought he would make such a nice husband
for you. Oh, Anne, dear, don’t be cross, but how do you know that
this young man of yours is telling the truth? You believe every
word he says.”

“Of course I do,” I cried indignantly.

“But what is there in him that attracts you so? I don’t see that
there’s anything in him at all except his rather reckless good
looks and his modern Sheik-cum-Stone-Age love-making.”

I poured out the vials of my wrath upon Suzanne for some minutes.

“Just because you’re comfortably married and getting fat, you’ve
forgotten that there’s any such thing as romance,” I ended.

“Oh, I’m not getting fat, Anne. All the worry I’ve had about you
lately must have worn me to a shred.”

“You look particularly well nourished,” I said coldly. “I should
say you must have put on about half a stone.”

“And I don’t know that I’m so comfortably married either,” continued
Suzanne in a melancholy voice. “I’ve been having the most dreadful
cables from Clarence ordering me to come home at once. At last I
didn’t answer them, and now I haven’t heard for over a fortnight.”

I’m afraid I didn’t take Suzanne’s matrimonial troubles very
seriously. She will be able to get round Clarence all right when
the times comes. I turned the conversation to the subject of the
diamonds.

Suzanne looked at me with a dropped jaw.

“I must explain, Anne. You see, as soon as I began to suspect
Colonel Race, I was terribly upset about the diamonds. I wanted to
stay on at the Falls in case he might have kidnapped you somewhere
close by, but didn’t know what to do about the diamonds. I was
afraid to keep them in my possession——”

Suzanne looked round her uneasily, as though she feared the walls
might have ears, and then whispered vehemently in my ear.

“A distinctly good idea,” I approved. “At the time, that is. It’s
a bit awkward now. What did Sir Eustace do with the cases?”

“The big ones were sent down to Cape Town. I heard from Pagett
before I left the Falls, and he enclosed the receipt for their
storage. He’s leaving Cape Town to-day, by the by, to join Sir
Eustace in Johannesburg.”

“I see,” I said thoughtfully. “And the small ones, where are they?”

“I suppose Sir Eustace has got them with him.”

I turned the matter over in my mind.

“Well,” I said at last, “it’s awkward—but it’s safe enough. We’d
better do nothing for the present.”

Suzanne looked at me with a little smile.

“You don’t like doing nothing, do you, Anne?”

“Not very much,” I replied honestly.

The one thing I could do was to get hold of a time-table and see
what time Guy Pagett’s train would pass through Kimberley. I found
that it would arrive at 5.40 on the following afternoon and depart
again at 6. I wanted to see Pagett as soon as possible, and that
seemed to me a good opportunity. The situation on the Rand was
getting very serious, and it might be a long time before I got
another chance.

The only thing that livened up the day was a wire dispatched from
Johannesburg. A most innocent-sounding telegram:

“Arrived safely. All going well. Eric here, also Eustace, but not
Guy. Remain where you are for the present. Andy.”

Eric was our pseudonym for Race. I chose it because it is a name
I dislike exceedingly. There was clearly nothing to be done until
I could see Pagett. Suzanne employed herself in sending off a long
soothing cable to the far-off Clarence. She became quite sentimental
over him. In her way—which of course is quite different from me
and Harry—she is really fond of Clarence.

“I do wish he was here, Anne,” she gulped. “It’s such a long time
since I’ve seen him.”

“Have some face cream,” I said soothingly.

Suzanne rubbed a little on the tip of her charming nose.

“I shall want some more face cream soon too,” she remarked, “and
you can only get this kind in Paris.” She sighed. “Paris!”

“Suzanne,” I said, “very soon you’ll have had enough of South
Africa and adventure.”

“I should like a really nice hat,” admitted Suzanne wistfully.
“Shall I come with you to meet Guy Pagett to-morrow?”

“I prefer to go alone. He’d be shyer speaking before two of us.”

So it came about that I was standing in the doorway of the hotel
on the following afternoon, struggling with a recalcitrant parasol
that refused to go up, whilst Suzanne lay peacefully on her bed
with a book and a basket of fruit.

According to the hotel porter, the train was on its good behaviour
to-day and would be almost on time, though he was extremely doubtful
whether it would ever get through to Johannesburg. The line had
been blown up, so he solemnly assured me. It sounded cheerful!

The train drew in just ten minutes late. Everybody tumbled out on
the platform and began walking up and down feverishly. I had no
difficulty in espying Pagett. I accosted him eagerly. He gave his
usual nervous start at seeing me—somewhat accentuated this time.

“Dear me, Miss Beddingfeld, I understood that you had disappeared.”

“I have reappeared again,” I told him solemnly. “And how are you,
Mr. Pagett?”

“Very well, thank you—looking forward to taking up my work again
with Sir Eustace.”

“Mr. Pagett,” I said, “there is something I want to ask you. I hope
that you won’t be offended, but a lot hangs on it, more than you
can possibly guess. I want to know what you were doing at Marlow
on the 8th of January last?”

He started violently.

“Really, Miss Beddingfeld—I—indeed——”

“You _were_ there, weren’t you?”

“I—for reasons of my own I was in the neighbourhood, yes.”

“Won’t you tell me what those reasons were?”

“Sir Eustace has not already told you?”

“Sir Eustace? Does he know?”

“I am almost sure that he does. I hoped he had not recognized me,
but from the hints he has let drop, and his remarks, I fear it is
only too certain. In any case, I meant to make a clean breast of
the matter and offer him my resignation. He is a peculiar man, Miss
Beddingfeld, with an abnormal sense of humour. It seems to amuse
him to keep me on tenter-hooks. All the time, I dare say, he was
perfectly well aware of the true facts. Possibly he has known them
for years.”

I hoped that sooner or later I should be able to understand what
Pagett was talking about. He went on fluently:

“It is difficult for a man of Sir Eustace’s standing to put himself
in my position. I know that I was in the wrong, but it seemed a
harmless deception. I would have thought it better taste on his
part to have tackled me outright—instead of indulging in covert
jokes at my expense.”

A whistle blew, and the people began to surge back into the train.

“Yes, Mr. Pagett,” I broke in, “I’m sure I quite agree with all
you’re saying about Sir Eustace. _But why did you go to Marlow?”_

“It was wrong of me, but natural under the circumstances—yes, I
still feel natural under the circumstances.”

“What circumstances?” I cried desperately.

For the first time Pagett seemed to recognize that I was asking
him a question. His mind detached itself from the peculiarities of
Sir Eustace and his own justification and came to rest on me.

“I beg your pardon, Miss Beddingfeld,” he said stiffly, “but I fail
to see your concern in the matter.”

He was back in the train now, leaning down to speak to me. I felt
desperate. What could one do with a man like that?

“Of course, if it’s so dreadful that you’d be ashamed to speak of
it to me——” I began spitefully.

At last I had found the right stop. Pagett stiffened and flushed.

“Dreadful? Ashamed? I don’t understand you.”

“Then tell me.”

In three short sentences he told me. At last I knew Pagett’s
secret! It was not in the least what I expected.

I walked slowly back to the hotel. There a wire was handed to me.
I tore it open. It contained full and definite instructions for me
to proceed forthwith to Johannesburg, or rather to a station this
side of Johannesburg, where I should be met by a car. It was
signed, not Andy, but Harry.

I sat down in a chair to do some very serious thinking.




  CHAPTER XXXI


  _(From the diary of Sir Eustace Pedler)_


  Johannesburg,

  _March 7th._

Pagett has arrived. He is in a blue funk of course. Suggested at
once that we should go off to Pretoria. Then, when I had told him
kindly but firmly that we were going to remain here, he went to
the other extreme, wished he had his rifle here, and began bucking
about some bridge he guarded during the Great War. A railway bridge
at Little Puddecombe junction, or something of that sort.

I soon cut that short by telling him to unpack the big typewriter.
I thought that that would keep him employed for some time, because
the typewriter was sure to have gone wrong—it always does—and he
would have to take it somewhere to be mended. But I had forgotten
Pagett’s powers of being in the right.

“I’ve already unpacked all the cases, Sir Eustace. The typewriter
is in perfect condition.”

“What do you mean—all the cases?”

“The two small cases as well.”

“I wish you wouldn’t be so officious, Pagett. Those small cases
were no business of yours. They belong to Mrs. Blair.”

Pagett looked crestfallen. He hates to make a mistake.

“So you can just pack them up again neatly,” I continued. “After
that you can go out and look around you. Jo’burg will probably be
a heap of smoking ruins by to-morrow, so it may be your last
chance.”

I thought that that would get rid of him successfully for the
morning, at any rate.

“There is something I want to say to you when you have the leisure,
Sir Eustace.”

“I haven’t got it now,” I said hastily. “At this minute I have
absolutely no leisure whatsoever.”

Pagett retired.

“By the way,” I called after him, “what was there in those cases
of Mrs. Blair’s?”

“Some fur rugs, and a couple of fur—hats, I think.”

“That’s right,” I assented. “She bought them on the train. They
_are_ hats—of a kind—though I hardly wonder at your not recognizing
them. I dare say she’s going to wear one of them at Ascot. What
else was there?”

“Some rolls of films and some baskets—a lot of baskets——”

“There would be,” I assured him. “Mrs. Blair is the kind of woman
who never buys less than a dozen or so of anything.”

“I think that’s all, Sir Eustace, except some miscellaneous odds
and ends, a motor-veil and some odd gloves—that sort of thing.”

“If you hadn’t been a born idiot, Pagett, you would have seen from
the start that those couldn’t possibly be my belongings.”

“I thought some of them might belong to Miss Pettigrew.”

“Ah, that reminds me—what do you mean by picking me out such a
doubtful character as a secretary?”

And I told him about the searching cross-examination I had been
put through. Immediately I was sorry, I saw a glint in his eye that
I knew only too well. I changed the conversation hurriedly. But it
was too late. Pagett was on the war-path.

He next proceeded to bore me with a long pointless story about the
_Kilmorden._ It was about a roll of films and a wager. The roll of
films being thrown through a porthole in the middle of the night
by some steward who ought to have known better. I hate horse-play.
I told Pagett so, and he began to tell me the story all over again.
He tells a story extremely badly, anyway. It was a long time before
I could make head or tail of this one.

I did not see him again until lunch-time. Then he came in brimming
over with excitement, like a bloodhound on the scent. I never have
cared for bloodhounds. The upshot of it all was that he had seen
Rayburn.

“What?” I cried, startled.

Yes, he had caught sight of some one whom he was sure was Rayburn
crossing the street. Pagett had followed him.

“And who do you think I saw him stop and speak to? Miss Pettigrew!”

“What?”

“Yes, Sir Eustace. And that’s not all. I’ve been making inquiries
about her——”

“Wait a bit. What happened to Rayburn?”

“He and Miss Pettigrew went into that corner curio-shop——”

I uttered an involuntary exclamation. Pagett stopped inquiringly.

“Nothing,” I said. “Go on.”

“I waited outside for ages—but they didn’t come out. At last I went
in. Sir Eustace, there was no one in the shop! There must be
another way out.”

I stared at him.

“As I was saying, I came back to the hotel and made some inquiries
about Miss Pettigrew.” Pagett lowered his voice and breathed hard
as he always does when he wants to be confidential. “Sir Eustace,
a man was seen coming out of her room last night.”

I raised my eyebrows.

“And I always regarded her as a lady of such eminent respectability,”
I murmured.

Pagett went on without heeding.

“I went straight up and searched her room. What do you think I
found?”

I shook my head.

“This!”

Pagett held up a safety razor and a stick of shaving soap.

“What should a woman want with these?”

I don’t suppose Pagett ever reads the advertisements in the
high-class ladies’ papers. I do. Whilst not proposing to argue with
him on the subject, I refused to accept the presence of the razor
as proof positive of Miss Pettigrew’s sex. Pagett is so hopelessly
behind the times. I should not have been at all surprised if he
had produced a cigarette-case to support his theory. However, even
Pagett has his limits.

“You’re not convinced, Sir Eustace. What do you say to _this?”_

I inspected the article which he dangled aloft triumphantly.

“It looks like hair,” I remarked distastefully.

“It is hair. I think it’s what they call a toupee.”

“Indeed,” I commented.

“Now are you convinced that that Pettigrew woman is a man in
disguise?”

“Really, my dear Pagett, I think I am. I might have known it by
her feet.”

“Then that’s that. And now, Sir Eustace, I want to speak to you
about my private affairs. I cannot doubt, from your hints and your
continual allusions to the time I was in Florence, that you have
found me out.”

At last the mystery of what Pagett did in Florence is going to be
revealed!

“Make a clean breast of it, my dear fellow,” I said kindly. “Much
the best way.”

“Thank you, Sir Eustace.”

“Is it her husband? Annoying fellows, husbands. Always turning up
when they’re least expected.”

“I fail to follow you, Sir Eustace. Whose husband?”

“The lady’s husband.”

“What lady?”

“God bless my soul, Pagett, the lady you met in Florence. There
must have been a lady. Don’t tell me that you merely robbed a
church or stabbed an Italian in the back because you didn’t like
his face.”

“I am quite at a loss to understand you, Sir Eustace. I suppose
you are joking.”

“I am an amusing fellow sometimes, when I take the trouble, but I
can assure you that I am not trying to be funny this minute.”

“I hoped that as I was a good way off you had not recognized me,
Sir Eustace.”

“Recognized you where?”

“At Marlow, Sir Eustace?”

“At Marlow? What the devil were you doing at Marlow?”

“I thought you understood that——”

“I’m beginning to understand less and less. Go back to the beginning
of the story and start again. You went to Florence——”

“Then you don’t know after all—and you didn’t recognize me!”

“As far as I can judge, you seem to have given yourself away
needlessly—made a coward of by your conscience. But I shall be able
to tell better when I’ve heard the whole story. Now, then, take a
deep breath and start again. You went to Florence——”

“But I didn’t go to Florence. That is just it.”

“Well, where did you go, then?”

“I went home—to Marlow.”

“What the devil did you want to go to Marlow for?”

“I wanted to see my wife. She was in delicate health and expecting——”

“Your wife? But I didn’t know you were married?”

“No, Sir Eustace, that is just what I am telling you. I deceived
you in this matter.”

“How long have you been married?”

“Just over eight years. I had been married just six months when I
became your secretary. I did not want to lose the post. A resident
secretary is not supposed to have a wife, so I suppressed the
fact.”

“You take my breath away,” I remarked. “Where has she been all
these years?”

“We have had a small bungalow on the river at Marlow, quite close
to the Mill House, for over five years.”

“God bless my soul,” I muttered. “Any children?”

“Four children, Sir Eustace.”

I gazed at him in a kind of stupor. I might have known, all along,
that a man like Pagett couldn’t have a guilty secret. The
respectability of Pagett has always been my bane. That’s just the
kind of secret he would have—a wife and four children.

“Have you told this to any one else?” I demanded at last, when I
had gazed at him in fascinated interest for quite a long while.

“Only Miss Beddingfeld. She came to the station at Kimberley.”

I continued to stare at him. He fidgeted under my glance.

“I hope, Sir Eustace, that you are not seriously annoyed?”

“My dear fellow,” I said, “I don’t mind telling you here and now
that you’ve blinking well torn it!”

I went out seriously ruffled. As I passed the corner curio-shop,
I was assailed by a sudden irresistible temptation and went in.
The proprietor came forward obsequiously, rubbing his hands.

“Can I show you something? Furs, curios?”

“I want something quite out of the ordinary,” I said. “It’s for a
special occasion. Will you show me what you’ve got?”

“Perhaps you will come into my back room? We have many specialties
there?”

That is where I made a mistake. And I thought I was going to be so
clever. I followed him through the swinging _portières._




  CHAPTER XXXII


  _(Anne’s Narrative Resumed)_


I had great trouble with Suzanne. She argued, she pleaded, she even
wept before she would let me carry out my plan. But in the end I
got my own way. She promised to carry out my instructions to the
letter and came down to the station to bid me a tearful farewell.

I arrived at my destination the following morning early. I was met
by a short black-bearded Dutchman whom I had never seen before. He
had a car waiting and we drove off. There was a queer booming in
the distance, and I asked him what it was. “Guns,” he answered
laconically. So there was fighting going on in Jo’burg!

I gathered that our objective was a spot somewhere in the suburbs
of the city. We turned and twisted and made several detours to get
there, and every minute the guns were nearer. It was an exciting
time. At last we stopped before a somewhat ramshackle building.
The door was opened by a Kafir boy. My guide signed to me to enter.
I stood irresolute in the dingy square hall. The man passed me and
threw open a door.

“The young lady to see Mr. Harry Rayburn,” he said, and laughed.

Thus announced, I passed in. The room was sparsely furnished and
smelt of cheap tobacco smoke. Behind a desk a man sat writing. He
looked up and raised his eyebrows.

“Dear me,” he said, “if it isn’t Miss Beddingfeld!”

“I must be seeing double,” I apologized. “Is it Mr. Chichester, or
is it Miss Pettigrew? There is an extraordinary resemblance to both
of them.”

“Both characters are in abeyance for the moment. I have doffed my
petticoats—and my cloth likewise. Won’t you sit down?”

I accepted a seat composedly.

“It would seem,” I remarked, “that I have come to the wrong
address.”

“From your point of view, I am afraid you have. Really, Miss
Beddingfeld, to fall into the trap a second time!”

“It was not very bright of me,” I admitted meekly. Something about
my manner seemed to puzzle him.

“You hardly seem upset by the occurrence,” he remarked dryly.

“Would my going into heroics have any effect upon you?” I asked.

“It certainly would not.”

“My great-aunt Jane always used to say that a true lady was neither
shocked nor surprised at anything that might happen,” I murmured
dreamily. “I endeavour to live up to her precepts.”

I read Mr. Chichester-Pettigrew’s opinion so plainly written on
his face that I hastened into speech once more.

“You really are positively marvellous at make-up,” I said
generously. “All the time you were Miss Pettigrew I never recognized
you—even when you broke your pencil in the shock of seeing me climb
upon the train at Cape Town.”

He tapped upon the desk with the pencil he was holding in his hand
at the minute.

“All this is very well in its way, but we must get to business.
Perhaps, Miss Beddingfeld, you can guess why we required your
presence here?”

“You will excuse me,” I said, “but I never do business with any
one but principals.”

I had read the phrase or something like it in a money-lender’s
circular, and I was rather pleased with it. It certainly had a
devastating effect upon Mr. Chichester-Pettigrew. He opened his
mouth and then shut it again. I beamed upon him.

“My great-uncle George’s maxim,” I added, as an afterthought.
“Great-aunt Jane’s husband, you know. He made knobs for brass
beds.”

I doubt if Chichester-Pettigrew had ever been ragged before. He
didn’t like it at all.

“I think you would be wise to alter your tone, young lady.”

I did not reply, but yawned—a delicate little yawn that hinted at
intense boredom.

“What the devil——” he began forcibly.

I interrupted him.

“I can assure you it’s no good shouting at me. We are only wasting
time here. I have no intention of talking with underlings. You will
save a lot of time and annoyance by taking me straight to Sir
Eustace Pedler.”

“To——”

He looked dumbfounded.

“Yes,” I said. “Sir Eustace Pedler.”

“I—I—excuse me——”

He bolted from the room like a rabbit. I took advantage of the
respite to open my bag and powder my nose thoroughly. Also I
settled my hat at a more becoming angle. Then I settled myself to
wait with patience for my enemy’s return.

He reappeared in a subtly chastened mood.

“Will you come this way, Miss Beddingfeld?”

I followed him up the stairs. He knocked at the door of a room, a
brisk “Come in” sounded from inside, and he opened the door and
motioned to me to pass inside.

Sir Eustace Pedler sprang up to greet me, genial and smiling.

“Well, well, Miss Anne.” He shook me warmly by the hand. “I’m
delighted to see you. Come and sit down. Not tired after your
journey? That’s good.”

He sat down facing me, still beaming. It left me rather at a loss.
His manner was so completely natural.

“Quite right to insist on being brought straight to me,” he went
on. “Minks is a fool. A clever actor—but a fool. That was Minks
you saw downstairs.”

“Oh, really,” I said feebly.

“And now,” said Sir Eustace cheerfully, “let’s get down to facts.
How long have you known that I was the ‘Colonel’?”

“Ever since Mr. Pagett told me that he had seen you in Marlow when
you were supposed to be in Cannes.”

Sir Eustace nodded ruefully.

“Yes, I told the fool he’d blinking well torn it. He didn’t
understand of course. His whole mind was set on whether _I’d_
recognized _him._ It never occurred to him to wonder what I was
doing down there. A piece of sheer bad luck that was. I arranged
it all so carefully too, sending him off to Florence, telling the
hotel I was going over to Nice for one night or possibly two. Then,
by the time the murder was discovered, I was back again in Cannes,
with nobody dreaming that I’d ever left the Riviera.”

He still spoke quite naturally and unaffectedly. I had to pinch
myself to understand that this was all real—that the man in front
of me was really that deep-dyed criminal, the “Colonel.” I followed
things out in my mind.

“Then it was you who tried to throw me overboard on the _Kilmorden,”_
I said slowly. “It was you that Pagett followed up on deck that
night?”

He shrugged his shoulders.

“I apologize, my dear child, I really do. I always liked you—but
you were so confoundedly interfering. I couldn’t have all my plans
brought to naught by a chit of a girl.”

“I think your plan at the Falls was really the cleverest,” I said,
endeavouring to look at the thing in a detached fashion. “I would
have been ready to swear anywhere that you were in the hotel when
I went out. Seeing is believing in future.”

“Yes, Minks had one of his greatest successes as Miss Pettigrew,
and he can imitate my voice quite creditably.”

“There is one thing I should like to know.”

“Yes?”

“How did you induce Pagett to engage her?”

“Oh, that was quite simple. She met Pagett in the doorway of the
Trade Commissioner’s office or the Chamber of Mines, or wherever
it was he went—told him I had phoned down in a hurry, and that she
had been selected by the Government department in question. Pagett
swallowed it like a lamb.”

“You’re very frank,” I said, studying him.

“There’s no earthly reason why I shouldn’t be.”

I didn’t quite like the sound of that. I hastened to put my own
interpretation on it.

“You believe in the success of this Revolution? You’ve burnt your
boats.”

“For an otherwise intelligent young woman, that’s a singularly
unintelligent remark. No, my dear child, I do not believe in this
Revolution. I give it a couple of days longer and it will fizzle
out ignominiously.”

“Not one of your successes, in fact?” I said nastily.

“Like all women, you’ve no idea of business. The job I took on was
to supply certain explosives and arms—heavily paid for—to foment
feeling generally, and to incriminate certain people up to the
hilt. I’ve carried out my contract with complete success, and I
was careful to be paid in advance. I took special care over the
whole thing, as I intended it to be my last contract before retiring
from business. As for burning my boats, as you call it, I simply
don’t know what you mean. I’m not the rebel chief, or anything of
that kind—I’m a distinguished English visitor, who had the
misfortune to go nosing into a certain curio-shop—and saw a little
more than he was meant to, and so the poor fellow was kidnapped.
To-morrow, or the day after, when circumstances permit, I shall be
found tied up somewhere in a pitiable state of terror and
starvation.”

“Ah!” I said slowly. “But what about me?”

“That’s just it,” said Sir Eustace softly. “What about you? I’ve
got you here—I don’t want to rub it in in any way—but I’ve got you
here very neatly. The question is, what am I going to do with you?
The simplest way of disposing of you—and, I may add, the pleasantest
to myself—is the way of marriage. Wives can’t accuse their husbands,
you know, and I’d rather like a pretty young wife to hold my hand
and glance at me out of liquid eyes—don’t flash them at me so! You
quite frighten me. I see that the plan does not commend itself to
you?”

“It does not.”

Sir Eustace sighed.

“A pity! But I am no Adelphi villain. The usual trouble, I suppose.
You love another, as the books say.”

“I love another.”

“I thought as much—first I thought it was that long-legged, pompous
ass, Race, but I suppose it’s the young hero who fished you out of
the Falls that night. Women have no taste. Neither of those two
have half the brains that I have. I’m such an easy person to
underestimate.”

I think he was right about that. Although I knew well enough the
kind of man he was and must be, I could not bring myself to realize
it. He had tried to kill me on more than one occasion, he had
actually killed another woman, and he was responsible for endless
other deeds of which I knew nothing, and yet I was quite unable to
bring myself into the frame of mind for appreciating his deeds as
they deserved. I could not think of him as other than our amusing,
genial travelling companion. I could not even feel frightened of
him—and yet I knew he was capable of having me murdered in cold
blood if it struck him as necessary. The only parallel I can think
of is the case of Stevenson’s Long John Silver. He must have been
much the same kind of man.

“Well, well,” said this extraordinary person, leaning back in his
chair. “It’s a pity that the idea of being Lady Pedler doesn’t
appeal to you. The other alternatives are rather crude.”

I felt a nasty feeling going up and down my spine. Of course I had
known all along that I was taking a big risk, but the prize had
seemed worth it. Would things turn out as I had calculated, or
would they not?

“The fact of the matter is,” Sir Eustace was continuing, “I’ve a
weakness for you. I really don’t want to proceed to extremes.
Suppose you tell me the whole story, from the very beginning, and
let’s see what we can make of it. But no romancing, mind—I want
the truth.”

I was not going to make any mistake over that. I had a great deal
of respect for Sir Eustace’s shrewdness. It was a moment for the
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. I told him the
whole story, omitting nothing, up to the moment of my rescue by
Harry. When I had finished, he nodded his head in approval.

“Wise girl. You’ve made a clean breast of the thing. And let me
tell you I should soon have caught you out if you hadn’t. A lot of
people wouldn’t believe your story, anyway, especially the beginning
part, but I do. You’re the kind of girl who would start off like
that—at a moment’s notice, on the slenderest of motives. You’ve
had amazing luck, of course, but sooner or later the amateur runs
up against the professional and then the result is a foregone
conclusion. I am the professional. I started on this business when
I was quite a youngster. All things considered, it seemed to me a
good way of getting rich quickly. I always could think things out,
and devise ingenious schemes—and I never made the mistake of trying
to carry out my schemes myself. Always employ the expert—that has
been my motto. The one time I departed from it I came to grief—but
I couldn’t trust any one to do that job for me. Nadina knew too
much. I’m an easy-going man, kind-hearted and good tempered so long
as I’m not thwarted. Nadina both thwarted me and threatened me—just
as I was at the apex of a successful career. Once she was dead and
the diamonds were in my possession, I was safe. I’ve come to the
conclusion now that I bungled the job. That idiot Pagett, with his
wife and family! My fault—it tickled my sense of humour to employ
the fellow, with his Cinquecento poisoner’s face and his
mid-Victorian soul. A maxim for you, my dear Anne. Don’t let your
sense of humour carry you away. For years I’ve had an instinct that
it would be wise to get rid of Pagett, but the fellow was so
hard-working and conscientious that I honestly couldn’t find an
excuse for sacking him. So I left things drift.

“But we’re wandering from the point. The question is what to do
with you. Your narrative was admirably clear, but there is one
thing that still escapes me. Where are the diamonds now?”

“Harry Rayburn has them,” I said, watching him.

His face did not change, it retained its expression of sardonic
good-humour.

“H’m. I want those diamonds.”

“I don’t see much chance of your getting them,” I replied.

“Don’t you? Now I do. I don’t want to be unpleasant, but I should
like you to reflect that a dead girl or so found in this quarter
of the city will occasion no surprise. There’s a man downstairs
who does those sort of jobs very neatly. Now, you’re a sensible
young woman. What I propose is this: you will sit down and write
to Harry Rayburn, telling him to join you here and bring the
diamonds with him——”

“I won’t do anything of the kind.”

“Don’t interrupt your elders. I propose to make a bargain with you.
The diamonds in exchange for your life. And don’t make any mistake
about it, your life is absolutely in my power.”

“And Harry?”

“I’m far too tender-hearted to part two young lovers. He shall go
free too—on the understanding, of course, that neither of you will
interfere with me in future.”

“And what guarantee have I that you will keep your side of the
bargain?”

“None whatever, my dear girl. You’ll have to trust me and hope for
the best. Of course, if you’re in an heroic mood and prefer
annihilation, that’s another matter.”

This was what I had been playing for. I was careful not to jump at
the bait. Gradually I allowed myself to be bullied and cajoled into
yielding. I wrote at Sir Eustace’s dictation:

Dear Harry,

I think I see a chance of establishing your innocence beyond any
possible doubt. Please follow my instructions minutely. Go to
Agrasato’s curio-shop. Ask to see something “out of the ordinary,”
“for a special occasion.” The man will then ask you to “come into
the back room.” Go with him. You will find a messenger who will
bring you to me. Do exactly as he tells you. Be sure and bring the
diamonds with you. Not a word to any one.

Sir Eustace stopped. “I leave the fancy touches to your own
imagination,” he remarked. “But be careful to make no mistakes.”

“‘Yours for ever and ever, Anne,’ will be sufficient,” I remarked.

I wrote in the words. Sir Eustace stretched out his hand for the
letter and read it through.

“That seems all right. Now the address.”

I gave it him. It was that of a small shop which received letters
and telegrams for a consideration.

He struck the bell upon the table with his hand. Chichester-Pettigrew,
_alias_ Minks, answered the summons.

“This letter is to go immediately—the usual route.”

“Very well, Colonel.”

He looked at the name on the envelope. Sir Eustace was watching
him keenly.

“A friend of yours, I think?”

“Of mine?”

The man seemed startled.

“You had a prolonged conversation with him in Johannesburg
yesterday.”

“A man came up and questioned me about your movements and those of
Colonel Race. I gave him misleading information.”

“Excellent, my dear fellow, excellent,” said Sir Eustace genially.
“My mistake.”

I chanced to look at Chichester-Pettigrew as he left the room. He
was white to the lips, as though in deadly terror. No sooner was
he outside than Sir Eustace picked up a speaking-tube that rested
by his elbow and spoke down it.

“That you, Schwart? Watch Minks. He’s not to leave the house
without orders.”

He put the speaking-tube down again and frowned, slightly tapping
the table with his hand.

“May I ask you a few questions, Sir Eustace,” I said, after a
minute or two of silence.

“Certainly. What excellent nerves you have, Anne. You are capable
of taking an intelligent interest in things when most girls would
be sniffling and wringing their hands.”

“Why did you take Harry as your secretary instead of giving him up
to the police?”

“I wanted those cursed diamonds. Nadina, the little devil, was
playing off your Harry against me. Unless I gave her the price she
wanted, she threatened to sell them back to him. That was another
mistake I made—I thought she’d have them with her that day. But
she was too clever for that. Carton, her husband, was dead too—I’d
no clue whatsoever as to where the diamonds were hidden. Then I
managed to get a copy of a wireless message sent to Nadina by some
one on board the _Kilmorden_—either Carton or Rayburn, I didn’t
know which. It was a duplicate of that piece of paper you picked
up. ‘Seventeen one twenty two,’ it ran. I took it to be an
appointment with Rayburn, and when he was so desperate to get
aboard the _Kilmorden_ I was convinced that I was right. So I
pretended to swallow his statements, and let him come. I kept a
pretty sharp watch upon him and hoped that I should learn more.
Then I found Minks trying to play a lone hand and interfering with
me. I soon stopped that. He came to heel all right. It was annoying
not getting Cabin 17, and it worried me not being able to place
you. Were you the innocent young girl you seemed, or were you not?
When Rayburn set out to keep the appointment that night, Minks was
told off to intercept him. Minks muffed it of course.”

“But why did the wireless message say ‘seventeen’ instead of
‘seventy-one’?”

“I’ve thought that out. Carton must have given that wireless
operator his own memorandum to copy off on to a form, and he never
read the copy through. The operator made the same mistake we all
did, and read it as 17.1.22 instead of 1.71.22. The thing I don’t
know is how Minks got on to Cabin 17. It must have been sheer
instinct.”

“And the dispatch to General Smuts? Who tampered with that?”

“My dear Anne, you don’t suppose I was going to have a lot of my
plans given away, without making an effort to save them? With an
escaped murderer as a secretary, I had no hesitation whatever in
substituting blanks. Nobody would think of suspecting poor old
Pedler.”

“What about Colonel Race?”

“Yes, that was a nasty jar. When Pagett told me he was a Secret
Service fellow, I had an unpleasant feeling down the spine. I
remembered that he’d been nosing around Nadina in Paris during the
War—and I had a horrible suspicion that he was out after _me!_ I
don’t like the way he’s stuck to me ever since. He’s one of those
strong, silent men who have always got something up their sleeve.”

A whistle sounded. Sir Eustace picked up the tube, listened for a
minute or two, then answered:

“Very well, I’ll see him now.”

“Business,” he remarked. “Miss Anne, let me show you your room.”

He ushered me into a small shabby apartment, a Kafir boy brought
up my small suit-case, and Sir Eustace, urging me to ask for
anything I wanted, withdrew, the picture of a courteous host. A
can of hot water was on the washstand, and I proceeded to unpack
a few necessaries. Something hard and unfamiliar in my sponge-bag
puzzled me greatly. I untied the string and looked inside.

To my utter amazement I drew out a small pearl-handled revolver.
It hadn’t been there when I started from Kimberley. I examined the
thing gingerly. It appeared to be loaded.

I handled it with a comfortable feeling. It was a useful thing to
have in a house such as this. But modern clothes are quite unsuited
to the carrying of fire-arms. In the end I pushed it gingerly into
the top of my stocking. It made a terrible bulge, and I expected
every minute that it would go off and shoot me in the leg, but it
really seemed the only place.




  CHAPTER XXXIII


I was not summoned to Sir Eustace’s presence until late in the
afternoon. Eleven-o’clock tea and a substantial lunch had been
served to me in my own apartment, and I felt fortified for further
conflict.

Sir Eustace was alone. He was walking up and down the room, and
there was a gleam in his eye and a restlessness in his manner which
did not escape me. He was exultant about something. There was a
subtle change in his manner towards me.

“I have news for you. Your young man is on his way. He will be here
in a few minutes. Moderate your transports—I have something more
to say. You attempted to deceive me this morning. I warned you that
you would be wise to stick to the truth, and up to a certain point
you obeyed me. Then you ran off the rails. You attempted to make
me believe that the diamonds were in Harry Rayburn’s possession.
At the time, I accepted your statement because it facilitated my
task—the task of inducing you to decoy Harry Rayburn here. But, my
dear Anne, the diamonds have been in my possession ever since I
left the Falls—though I only discovered the fact yesterday.”

“You know!” I gasped.

“It may interest you to hear that it was Pagett who gave the show
away. He insisted on boring me with a long pointless story about
a wager and a tin of films. It didn’t take me long to put two and
two together—Mrs. Blair’s distrust of Colonel Race, her agitation,
her entreaty that I would take care of her souvenirs for her. The
excellent Pagett had already unfastened the cases through an excess
of zeal. Before leaving the hotel, I simply transferred all the
rolls of films to my own pocket. They are in the corner there. I
admit that I haven’t had time to examine them yet, but I notice
that one is of a totally different weight to the others, rattles
in a peculiar fashion, and has evidently been stuck down with
seccotine, which will necessitate the use of a tin-opener. The case
seems clear, does it not? And now, you see, I have you both nicely
in the trap. . . . It’s a pity that you didn’t take kindly to the
idea of becoming Lady Pedler.”

I did not answer. I stood looking at him.

There was the sound of feet on the stairs, the door was flung open,
and Harry Rayburn was hustled into the room between two men. Sir
Eustace flung me a look of triumph.

“According to plan,” he said softly. “You amateurs _will_ pit
yourselves against professionals.”

“What’s the meaning of this?” cried Harry hoarsely.

“It means that you have walked into my parlour—said the spider to
the fly,” remarked Sir Eustace facetiously. “My dear Rayburn, you
are extraordinarily unlucky.”

“You said I could come safely, Anne?”

“Do not reproach her, my dear fellow. That note was written at my
dictation, and the lady could not help herself. She would have been
wiser not to write it, but I did not tell her so at the time. You
followed her instructions, went to the curio-shop, were taken
through the secret passage from the back room—and found yourself
in the hands of your enemies!”

Harry looked at me. I understood his glance and edged nearer to
Sir Eustace.

“Yes,” murmured the latter, “decidedly you are not lucky! This
is—let me see, the third encounter.”

“You are right,” said Harry. “This is the third encounter. Twice
you have worsted me—have you never heard that the third time the
luck changes? This is my round—cover him, Anne.”

I was all ready. In a flash I had whipped the pistol out of my
stocking and was holding it to his head. The two men guarding Harry
sprang forward, but his voice stopped them.

“Another step—and he dies! If they come any nearer, Anne, pull the
trigger—don’t hesitate.”

“I shan’t,” I replied cheerfully. “I’m rather afraid of pulling
it, anyway.”

I think Sir Eustace shared my fears. He was certainly shaking like
a jelly.

“Stay where you are,” he commanded, and the men stopped obediently.

“Tell them to leave the room,” said Harry.

Sir Eustace gave the order. The men filed out, and Harry shot the
bolt across the door behind them.

“Now we can talk,” he observed grimly, and coming across the room,
he took the revolver out of my hand.

Sir Eustace uttered a sigh of relief and wiped his forehead with
a handkerchief.

“I’m shockingly out of condition,” he observed. “I think I must
have a weak heart. I am glad that revolver is in competent hands.
I didn’t trust Miss Anne with it. Well, my young friend, as you
say, now we can talk. I’m willing to admit that you stole a march
upon me. Where the devil that revolver came from I don’t know. I
had the girl’s luggage searched when she arrived. And where did
you produce it from now? You hadn’t got it on you a minute ago?”

“Yes, I had,” I replied. “It was in my stocking.”

“I don’t know enough about women. I ought to have studied them
more,” said Sir Eustace sadly. “I wonder if Pagett would have known
that?”

Harry rapped sharply on the table.

“Don’t play the fool. If it weren’t for your grey hairs, I’d throw
you out of the window. You damned scoundrel! Grey hairs, or no grey
hairs, I——”

He advanced a step or two, and Sir Eustace skipped nimbly behind
the table.

“The young are always so violent,” he said reproachfully. “Unable
to use their brains, they rely solely on their muscles. Let us talk
sense. For the moment you have the upper hand. But that state of
affairs cannot continue. The house is full of my men. You are
hopelessly outnumbered. Your momentary ascendency has been gained
by an accident——”

“Has it?”

Something in Harry’s voice, a grim raillery, seemed to attract Sir
Eustace’s attention. He stared at him.

“Has it?” said Harry again. “Sit down, Sir Eustace, and listen to
what I have to say.” Still covering him with the revolver, he went
on: “The cards are against you this time. To begin with, listen to
_that!”_

_That_ was a dull banging at the door below. There were shouts,
oaths, and then a sound of firing. Sir Eustace paled.

“What’s that?”

“Race—and his people. You didn’t know, did you, Sir Eustace, that
Anne had an arrangement with me by which we should know whether
communications from one to the other were genuine? Telegrams were
to be signed ‘Andy,’ letters were to have the word ‘and’ crossed
out somewhere in them. Anne knew that your telegram was a fake.
She came here of her own free will, walked deliberately into the
snare, in the hope that she might catch you in your own trap.
Before leaving Kimberley she wired both to me and to Race. Mrs.
Blair has been in communication with us ever since. I received the
letter written at your dictation, which was just what I expected.
I had already discussed the probabilities of a secret passage
leading out of the curio-shop with Race, and he had discovered the
place where the exit was situated.”

There was a screaming, tearing sound, and a heavy explosion which
shook the room.

“They’re shelling this part of the town. I must get you out of
here, Anne.”

A bright light flared up. The house opposite was on fire. Sir
Eustace had risen and was passing up and down. Harry kept him
covered with the revolver.

“So you see, Sir Eustace, the game is up. It was you yourself who
very kindly provided us with the clue of your whereabouts. Race’s
men were watching the exit of the secret passage. In spite of the
precautions you took, they were successful in following me here.”

Sir Eustace turned suddenly.

“Very clever. Very creditable. But I’ve still a word to say. If
I’ve lost the trick, so have you. You’ll never be able to bring
the murder of Nadina home to me. I was in Marlow on that day,
that’s all you’ve got against me. No one can prove that I even knew
the woman. But you knew her, you had a motive for killing her—and
your record’s against you. You’re a thief, remember, a thief.
There’s one thing you don’t know, perhaps. _I’ve got the diamonds._
And here goes——”

With an incredibly swift movement, he stooped, swung up his arm
and threw. There was a tinkle of breaking glass, as the object went
through the window and disappeared into the blazing mass opposite.

“There goes your only hope of establishing your innocence over the
Kimberley affair. And now we’ll talk. I’ll drive a bargain with
you. You’ve got me cornered. Race will find all he needs in this
house. There’s a chance for me if I can get away. I’m done for if
I stay, but so are you, young man! There’s a skylight in the next
room. A couple of minutes’ start and I shall be all right. I’ve
got one or two little arrangements all ready made. You let me out
that way, and give me a start—and I leave you a signed confession
that I killed Nadina.”

_“Yes,_ Harry,” I cried. “Yes, yes, yes!”

He turned a stern face on me.

“No, Anne, a thousand times, no. You don’t know what you’re saying.”

“I do. It solves everything.”

“I’d never be able to look Race in the face again. I’ll take my
chance, but I’m damned if I’ll let this slippery old fox get away.
It’s no good, Anne. I won’t do it.”

Sir Eustace chuckled. He accepted defeat without the least emotion.

“Well, well,” he remarked. “You seem to have met your master, Anne.
But I can assure you both that moral rectitude does not always
pay.”

There was a crash of rending wood, and footsteps surged up the
stairs. Harry drew back the bolt. Colonel Race was the first to
enter the room. His face lit at the sight of us.

“You’re safe, Anne. I was afraid——” He turned to Sir Eustace. “I’ve
been after you for a long time, Pedler—and at last I’ve got you.”

“Everybody seems to have gone completely mad,” declared Sir Eustace
airily. “These young people have been threatening me with revolvers
and accusing me of the most shocking things. I don’t know what it’s
all about.”

“Don’t you? It means that I’ve found the ‘Colonel.’ It means that
on January 8th last you were not at Cannes, but at Marlow. It means
that when your tool, Madame Nadina, turned against you, you planned
to do away with her—and at last we shall be able to bring the crime
home to you.”

“Indeed? And from whom did you get all this interesting information?
From the man who is even now being looked for by the police? His
evidence will be very valuable.”

“We have other evidence. There is some one else who knew that
Nadina was going to meet you at the Mill House.”

Sir Eustace looked surprised. Colonel Race made a gesture with his
hand. Arthur Minks _alias_ the Rev. Edward Chichester _alias_ Miss
Pettigrew stepped forward. He was pale and nervous, but he spoke
clearly enough:

“I saw Nadina in Paris the night before she went over to England.
I was posing at the time as a Russian Count. She told me of her
purpose. I warned her, knowing what kind of man she had to deal
with, but she did not take my advice. There was a wireless message
on the table. I read it. Afterwards I thought I would have a try
for the diamonds myself. In Johannesburg, Mr. Rayburn accosted me.
He persuaded me to come over to his side.”

Sir Eustace looked at him. He said nothing, but Minks seemed
visibly to wilt.

“Rats always leaving a sinking ship,” observed Sir Eustace. “I
don’t care for rats. Sooner or later, I destroy vermin.”

“There’s just one thing I’d like to tell you, Sir Eustace,” I
remarked. “That tin you threw out of the window didn’t contain the
diamonds. It had common pebbles in it. The diamonds are in a
perfectly safe place. As a matter of fact, they’re in the big
giraffe’s stomach. Suzanne hollowed it out, put the diamonds in
with cotton wool, so that they wouldn’t rattle, and plugged it up
again.”

Sir Eustace looked at me for some time. His reply was characteristic:

“I always did hate that blinking giraffe,” he said. “It must have
been instinct.”




  CHAPTER XXXIV


We were not able to return to Johannesburg that night. The shells
were coming over pretty fast, and I gathered that we were now more
or less cut off, owing to the rebels having obtained possession of
a new part of the suburbs.

Our place of refuge was a farm some twenty miles or so from
Johannesburg—right out on the veld. I was dropping with fatigue.
All the excitement and anxiety of the last two days had left me
little better than a limp rag.

I kept repeating to myself, without being able to believe it, that
our troubles were really over. Harry and I were together and we
should never be separated again. Yet all through I was conscious
of some barrier between us—a constraint on his part, the reason of
which I could not fathom.

Sir Eustace had been driven off in an opposite direction accompanied
by a strong guard. He waved his hand airily to us on departing.

I came out on to the _stoep_ early on the following morning and
looked across the veld in the direction of Johannesburg. I could
see the great dumps glistening in the pale morning sunshine, and
I could hear the low rumbling mutter of the guns. The Revolution
was not over yet.

The farmer’s wife came out and called me in to breakfast. She was
a kind, motherly soul, and I was already very fond of her. Harry
had gone out at dawn and had not yet returned, so she informed me.
Again I felt a stir of uneasiness pass over me. What was this
shadow of which I was so conscious between us?

After breakfast I sat out on the _stoep_, a book in my hand which
I did not read. I was so lost in my own thoughts that I never saw
Colonel Race ride up and dismount from his horse. It was not until
he said “Good morning, Anne,” that I became aware of his presence.

“Oh,” I said, with a flush, “it’s you.”

“Yes. May I sit down?”

He drew a chair up beside me. It was the first time we had been
alone together since that day at the Matoppos. As always, I felt
that curious mixture of fascination and fear that he never failed
to inspire in me.

“What is the news?” I asked.

“Smuts will be in Johannesburg to-morrow. I give this outbreak
three days more before it collapses utterly. In the meantime the
fighting goes on.”

“I wish,” I said, “that one could be sure that the right people
were the ones to get killed. I mean the ones who wanted to fight—not
just all the poor people who happen to live in the parts where the
fighting is going on.”

He nodded.

“I know what you mean, Anne. That’s the unfairness of war. But I’ve
other news for you.”

“Yes?”

“A confession of incompetency on my part. Pedler has managed to
escape.”

“What?”

“Yes. No one knows how he managed it. He was securely locked up
for the night—in an upper-story room of one of the farms roundabouts
which the Military have taken over, but this morning the room was
empty and the bird had flown.”

Secretly I was rather pleased. Never, to this day, have I been able
to rid myself of a sneaking fondness for Sir Eustace. I dare say
it’s reprehensible, but there it is. I admired him. He was a
thorough-going villain, I dare say—but he was a pleasant one. I’ve
never met any one half so amusing since.

I concealed my feelings, of course. Naturally Colonel Race would
feel quite differently about it. He wanted Sir Eustace brought to
justice. There was nothing very surprising in his escape when one
came to think of it. All round Jo’burg he must have innumerable
spies and agents. And, whatever Colonel Race might think, I was
exceedingly doubtful that they would ever catch him. He probably
had a well-planned line of retreat. Indeed, he had said as much to
us.

I expressed myself suitably, though in a rather lukewarm manner,
and the conversation languished. Then Colonel Race asked suddenly
for Harry. I told him that he had gone off at dawn and that I
hadn’t seen him this morning.

“You understand, don’t you, Anne, that apart from formalities, he
is completely cleared? There are technicalities, of course, but
Sir Eustace’s guilt is well assured. There is nothing now to keep
you apart.”

He said this without looking at me, in a slow, jerky voice.

“I understand,” I said gratefully.

“And there is no reason why he should not at once resume his real
name.”

“No, of course not.”

“You know his real name?”

The question surprised me.

“Of course I do. Harry Lucas.”

He did not answer, and something in the quality of his silence
struck me as peculiar.

“Anne, do you remember that, as we drove home from the Matoppos
that day, I told you that I knew what I had to do?”

“Of course I remember.”

“I think that I may fairly say I have done it. The man you love is
cleared of suspicion.”

“Was that what you meant?”

“Of course.”

I hung my head, ashamed of the baseless suspicion I had entertained.
He spoke again in a thoughtful voice:

“When I was a mere youngster, I was in love with a girl who jilted
me. After that I thought only of my work. My career meant everything
to me. Then I met you, Anne—and all that seemed worth nothing. But
youth’s call to youth. . . . I’ve still got my work.”

I was silent. I suppose one can’t really love two men at once—but
you can feel like it. The magnetism of this man was very great. I
looked up at him suddenly.

“I think that you’ll go very far,” I said dreamily. “I think that
you’ve got a great career ahead of you. You’ll be one of the
world’s big men.”

I felt as though I was uttering a prophecy.

“I shall be alone, though.”

“All the people who do really big things are.”

“You think so?”

“I’m sure of it.”

He took my hand and said in a low voice:

“I’d rather have had—the other.”

Then Harry came striding round the corner of the house. Colonel
Race rose.

“Good morning—Lucas,” he said.

For some reason Harry flushed up to the roots of his hair.

“Yes,” I said gaily, “you must be known by your real name now.”

But Harry was still staring at Colonel Race.

“So you know, sir,” he said at last.

“I never forget a face. I saw you once as a boy.”

“What’s all this about?” I asked, puzzled, looking from one to the
other.

It seemed a conflict of wills between them. Race won. Harry turned
slightly away.

“I suppose you’re right, sir. Tell her my real name.”

“Anne, this isn’t Harry Lucas. Harry Lucas was killed in the War.
This is John Harold Eardsley.”




  CHAPTER XXXV


With his last words Colonel Race had swung away and left us. I
stood staring after him. Harry’s voice recalled me to myself.

“Anne, forgive me, say you forgive me.”

He took my hand in his and almost mechanically I drew it away.

“Why did you deceive me?”

“I don’t know that I can make you understand. I was afraid of all
that sort of thing—the power and fascination of wealth. I wanted
you to care for me just for myself—for the man I was—without
ornaments and trappings.”

“You mean you didn’t trust me?”

“You can put it that way if you like, but it isn’t quite true. I’d
become embittered, suspicious—always prone to look for ulterior
motives—and it was so wonderful to be cared for in the way you
cared for me.”

“I see,” I said slowly. I was going over in my own mind the story
he had told me. For the first time I noted discrepancies in it
which I had disregarded—an assurance of money, the power to buy
back the diamonds of Nadina, the way in which he had preferred to
speak of both men from the point of view of an outsider. And when
he had said “my friend” he had meant, not Eardsley, but Lucas. It
was Lucas, the quiet fellow, who had loved Nadina so deeply.

“How did it come about?” I asked.

“We were both reckless—anxious to get killed. One night we exchanged
identification discs—for luck! Lucas was killed the next day—blown
to pieces.”

I shuddered.

“But why didn’t you tell me now? This morning? You couldn’t have
doubted my caring for you by this time?”

“Anne, I didn’t want to spoil it all. I wanted to take you back to
the island. What’s the good of money? It can’t buy happiness. We’d
have been happy on the island. I tell you I’m afraid of that other
life—it nearly rotted me through once.”

“Did Sir Eustace know who you really were?”

“Oh, yes.”

“And Carton?”

“No. He saw us both with Nadina at Kimberley one night, but he
didn’t know which was which. He accepted my statement that I was
Lucas, and Nadina was deceived by his cable. She was never afraid
of Lucas. He was a quiet chap—very deep. But I always had the
devil’s own temper. She’d have been scared out of her life if she’d
known that I’d come to life again.”

“Harry, if Colonel Race hadn’t told me, what did you mean to do?”

“Say nothing. Go on as Lucas.”

“And your father’s millions?”

“Race was welcome to them. Anyway, he would make a better use of
them than I ever shall. Anne, what are you thinking about? You’re
frowning so.”

“I’m thinking,” I said slowly, “that I almost wish Colonel Race
hadn’t made you tell me.”

“No. He was right. I owed you the truth.”

He paused, then said suddenly:

“You know, Anne, I’m jealous of Race. He loves you too—and he’s a
bigger man than I am or ever shall be.”

I turned to him, laughing.

“Harry, you idiot. It’s you I want—and that’s all that matters.”

As soon as possible we started for Cape Town. There Suzanne was
waiting to greet me, and we disembowelled the big giraffe together.
When the Revolution was finally quelled, Colonel Race came down to
Cape Town and at his suggestion the big villa at Muizenberg that
had belonged to Sir Lawrence Eardsley was reopened and we all took
up our abode in it.

There we made our plans. I was to return to England with Suzanne
and to be married from her house in London. And the trousseau was
to be bought in Paris! Suzanne enjoyed planning all these details
enormously. So did I. And yet the future seemed curiously unreal.
And sometimes, without knowing why, I felt absolutely stifled—as
though I couldn’t breathe.

It was the night before we were to sail. I couldn’t sleep. I was
miserable, and I didn’t know why. I hated leaving Africa. When I
came back to it, would it be the same thing? Would it ever be the
same thing again?

And then I was startled by an authoritative rap on the shutter. I
sprang up. Harry was on the _stoep_ outside.

“Put some clothes on, Anne, and come out. I want to speak to you.”

I huddled on a few garments, and stepped out into the cool night
air—still and scented, with its velvety feel. Harry beckoned me
out of earshot of the house. His face looked pale and determined
and his eyes were blazing.

“Anne, do you remember saying to me once that women enjoyed doing
the things they disliked for the sake of some one they liked?”

“Yes,” I said, wondering what was coming.

He caught me in his arms.

“Anne, come away with me—now—to-night. Back to Rhodesia—back to
the island. I can’t stand all this tomfoolery. I can’t wait for
you any longer.”

I disengaged myself a minute.

“And what about my French frocks?” I lamented mockingly.

To this day Harry never knows when I’m in earnest and when I’m only
teasing him.

“Damn your French frocks. Do you think I want to put frocks on you?
I’m a damned sight more likely to want to tear them off you. I’m
not going to let you go, do you hear? You’re my woman. If I let
you go away, I may lose you. I’m never sure of you. You’re coming
with me now—to-night—and damn everybody.”

He held me to him, kissing me until I could hardly breathe.

“I can’t do without you any longer, Anne. I can’t indeed. I hate
all this money. Let Race have it. Come on. Let’s go.”

“My toothbrush?” I demurred.

“You can buy one. I know I’m a lunatic, but for God’s sake, _come!”_

He stalked off at a furious pace. I followed him as meekly as the
Barotsi woman I had observed at the Falls. Only I wasn’t carrying
a frying-pan on my head. He walked so fast that it was very
difficult to keep up with him.

“Harry,” I said at last, in a meek voice, “are we going to walk
all the way to Rhodesia?”

He turned suddenly and with a great shout of laughter gathered me
up in his arms.

“I’m mad, sweetheart, I know it. But I do love you so.”

“We’re a couple of lunatics. And, oh, Harry, you never asked me,
but I’m not making a sacrifice at all! I _wanted_ to come!”




  CHAPTER XXXVI


That was two years ago. We still live on the island. Before me, on
the rough wooden table, is the letter that Suzanne wrote me.

Dear Babes in the Wood—Dear Lunatics in Love,

I’m not surprised—not at all. All the time we’ve been talking Paris
and frocks I felt that it wasn’t a bit real—that you’d vanish into
the blue some day to be married over the tongs in the good old
gipsy fashion. But you _are_ a couple of lunatics! This idea of
renouncing a vast fortune is absurd. Colonel Race wanted to argue
the matter, but I have persuaded him to leave the argument to time.
He can administer the estate for Harry—and none better. Because,
after all, honeymoons don’t last forever—you’re not here, Anne, so
I can safely say that without having you fly out at me like a
little wild-cat—Love in the wilderness will last a good while, but
one day you will suddenly begin to dream of houses in Park Lane,
sumptuous furs, Paris frocks, the largest thing in motors and the
latest thing in perambulators, French maids and Norland nurses!
Oh, yes, you will!

But have your honeymoon, dear lunatics, and let it be a long one.
And think of me sometimes, comfortably putting on weight amidst
the fleshpots!

Your loving friend, Suzanne Blair.

P.S.—I am sending you an assortment of frying-pans as a wedding
present, and an enormous _terrine_ of _pâté de foie gras_ to remind
you of me.

There is another letter that I sometimes read. It came a good while
after the other and was accompanied by a bulky packet. It appeared
to be written from somewhere in Bolivia.

My dear Anne Beddingfeld,

I can’t resist writing to you, not so much for the pleasure it
gives me to write, as for the enormous pleasure I know it will give
you to hear from me. Our friend Race wasn’t quite as clever as he
thought himself, was he?

I think I shall appoint you my literary executor. I’m sending you
my diary. There’s nothing in it that would interest Race and his
crowd, but I fancy that there are passages in it which may amuse
you. Make use of it in any way you like. I suggest an article for
the _Daily Budget,_ “Criminals I have met.” I only stipulate that
I shall be the central figure.

By this time I have no doubt that you are no longer Anne Beddingfeld,
but Lady Eardsley, queening it in Park Lane. I should just like to
say that I bear you no malice whatever. It is hard, of course, to
have to begin all over again at my time of life, but, _entre nous,_
I had a little reserve fund carefully put aside for such a
contingency. It has come in very usefully and I am getting together
a nice little connection. By the way, if you ever come across that
funny friend of yours, Arthur Minks, just tell him that I haven’t
forgotten him, will you? That will give him a nasty jar.

On the whole I think I have displayed a most Christian and forgiving
spirit. Even to Pagett. I happened to hear that he—or rather Mrs.
Pagett—had brought a sixth child into the world the other day.
England will be entirely populated by Pagetts soon. I sent the
child a silver mug, and, on a post card, declared my willingness
to act as god-father. I can see Pagett taking both mug and post
card straight to Scotland Yard without a smile on his face!

Bless you, liquid eyes. Some day you will see what a mistake you
have made in not marrying me.

Yours ever,

Eustace Pedler.

Harry was furious. It is the one point on which he and I do not
see eye to eye. To him, Sir Eustace was the man who tried to murder
me and whom he regards as responsible for the death of his friend.
Sir Eustace’s attempts on my life have always puzzled me. They are
not in the picture, so to speak. For I am sure that he always had
a genuinely kindly feeling towards me.

Then why did he twice attempt to take my life? Harry says “because
he’s a damned scoundrel,” and seems to think that settles the
matter. Suzanne was more discriminating. I talked it over with her,
and she put it down to a “fear complex.” Suzanne goes in rather
for psycho-analysis. She pointed out to me that Sir Eustace’s whole
life was actuated by a desire to be safe and comfortable. He had
an acute sense of self-preservation. And the murder of Nadina
removed certain inhibitions. His actions did not represent the
state of his feeling towards me, but were the result of his acute
fears for his own safety. I think Suzanne is right. As for Nadina,
she was the kind of woman who deserved to die. Men do all sorts of
questionable things in order to get rich, but women shouldn’t
pretend to be in love when they aren’t for ulterior motives.

I can forgive Sir Eustace easily enough, but I shall never forgive
Nadina. Never, never, never!

The other day I was unpacking some tins that were wrapped in bits
of an old _Daily Budget,_ and I suddenly came upon the words, “The
Man in the Brown Suit.” How long ago it seemed! I had, of course,
severed my connection with the _Daily Budget_ long ago—I had done
with it sooner than it had done with me. _My Romantic Wedding_ was
given a halo of publicity.

My son is lying in the sun, kicking his legs. There’s a “man in a
brown suit” if you like. He’s wearing as little as possible, which
is the best costume for Africa, and is as brown as a berry. He’s
always burrowing in the earth. I think he takes after Papa. He’ll
have that same mania for Pleiocene clay.

Suzanne sent me a cable when he was born:

“Congratulations and love to the latest arrival on Lunatics’
Island. Is his head dolichocephalic or brachycephalic?”

I wasn’t going to stand that from Suzanne. I sent her a reply of
one word, economical and to the point:

“Platycephalic!”





  THE END



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN IN THE BROWN SUIT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Missing Will
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Missing Will

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: January 15, 2022 [eBook #67173]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Consolidated Magazines Corporation (The Blue Book Magazine), 1925

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MISSING WILL ***
                           The Missing Will

             Hercule Poirot Solves an Extraordinary Case
                          by Agatha Christie

[Illustration]

The problem presented to us by Miss Violet Marsh made a rather
pleasant change from our usual routine work. Poirot had received a
brisk and businesslike note from the lady asking for an appointment,
and he had replied, asking her to call upon him at eleven o’clock the
following day.

She arrived punctually—a tall, handsome young woman, plainly but
neatly dressed, with an assured and businesslike manner—clearly, a
young woman who meant to get on in the world. I am not a great admirer
of the so-called New Woman myself, and in spite of her good looks, I
was not particularly prepossessed in her favor.

“My business is of a somewhat unusual nature, M. Poirot,” she began,
after she had accepted a chair. “I had better begin at the beginning
and tell you the whole story.”

“If you please, mademoiselle.”

“I am an orphan. My father was one of two brothers, sons of a small
yeoman farmer in Devonshire. The farm was a poor one, and the eldest
brother, Andrew, emigrated to Australia, where he did very well
indeed, and by means of successful speculation in land became a very
rich man. The younger brother, Roger, my father, had no leanings
toward the agricultural life. He managed to educate himself a little,
and obtained a post as a clerk in a small firm. He married slightly
above him; my mother was the daughter of a poor artist. My father died
when I was six years old. When I was fourteen, my mother followed him
to the grave. My only living relation then was my Uncle Andrew, who
had recently returned from Australia and bought a small place in his
native county, Crabtree Manor. He was exceedingly kind to his
brother’s orphan child, took me to live with him, and treated me in
every way as though I were his own daughter.

“Crabtree Manor,” she pursued, “in spite of its name, is really only
an old farmhouse. Farming was in my uncle’s blood, and he was
intensely interested in various modern farming experiments. Although
kindness itself to me, he had certain peculiar and deeply rooted ideas
as to the upbringing of women. Himself a man of little or no
education, though possessing remarkable shrewdness, he placed little
value on what he called ‘book knowledge.’ He was especially opposed to
the education of women. In his opinion, girls should learn practical
housework and dairy work, be useful about the home, and have as little
to do with book-learning as possible. He proposed to bring me up on
these lines, to my bitter disappointment.

“I rebelled frankly. I knew that I possessed a good brain, and had
absolutely no talent for domestic duties. My uncle and I had many
bitter arguments on the subject, for though much attached to each
other, we were both self-willed. I was lucky enough to win a
scholarship, and up to a certain point was successful in getting my
own way. The crisis arose when I resolved to go to Girton. I had a
little money of my own, left me by my mother, and I was quite
determined to make the best use of the gifts God had given me. I had
one long final argument with my uncle. He put the facts plainly before
me. He had no other relations, and he had intended me to be his sole
heiress. As I have told you, he was a very rich man. If I persisted in
these ‘newfangled notions’ of mine, however, I need look for nothing
from him. I remained polite, but firm. I should always be deeply
attached to him, but I must lead my own life. We parted on that note.
‘You fancy your brains, my girl,’ were his last words. ‘I’ve no
book-learning, but for all that, I’ll pit mine against yours any day.
We’ll see what we shall see.’

                  *       *       *       *       *

“That was nine years ago. I have stayed with him for a week-end
occasionally, and our relations were perfectly amicable, though his
views remained unaltered. He never referred to my having matriculated,
nor to my B. Sc. For the last three years his health has been failing,
and a month ago he died. I am now coming to the point of my visit. My
uncle left a most extraordinary will. By its terms, Crabtree Manor and
its contents are to be at my disposal for a year from his
death—‘during which time my clever niece may prove her wits,’ the
actual words run. At the end of that period, ‘my wits having proved
better than hers,’ the house and all my uncle’s large fortune pass to
various charitable institutions.”

“That is a little hard on you, mademoiselle,” commented Poirot,
“seeing that you were Mr. Marsh’s only blood relation.”

“I do not look on it in that way. Uncle Andrew warned me fairly, and I
chose my own path. Since I would not fall in with his wishes, he was
at perfect liberty to leave his money to whom he pleased.”

“Was the will drawn up by a lawyer?”

“No; it was written on a printed will-form and witnessed by the man
and his wife who lived in the house and looked after my uncle.”

“There might be a possibility of upsetting such a will?”

“I would not even attempt to do such a thing.”

“You regard it, then, as a sporting challenge on the part of your
uncle?”

“That is exactly how I look upon it.”

“It bears that interpretation, certainly,” said Poirot thoughtfully.
“Somewhere in this rambling old manor house your uncle has concealed
either a sum of money in notes, or possibly a second will, and has
given you a year in which to exercise your ingenuity to find it.”

“Exactly, M. Poirot, and I am paying you the compliment of assuming
that your ingenuity will be greater than mine.”

“Eh, eh! But that is very charming of you. My gray cells are at your
disposal. You have made no search yourself?”

“Only a cursory one, but I have too much respect for my uncle’s
undoubted abilities to fancy that the task will be an easy one.”

“Have you the will, or a copy of it with you?”

Miss Marsh handed a document across the table. Poirot ran through it,
nodding to himself.

“Made three years ago. Dated March 25, and the time is given
also—eleven a. m.—that is very suggestive. It narrows the field of
search. Assuredly it is another will we have to seek for. A will made
even half an hour later would upset this. _Eh bien_, mademoiselle, it
is a problem charming and ingenious that you have presented to me
here. I shall have all the pleasure in the world in solving it for
you. Granted that your uncle was a man of ability, his gray cells
cannot have been of the quality of Hercule Poirot’s!”

(Really, Poirot’s vanity is blatant!)

“Fortunately, I have nothing of moment on hand at the minute. Hastings
and I will go down to Crabtree Manor tonight. The man and wife who
attended on your uncle are still there, I presume?”

“Yes, their name is Baker.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

The following morning saw us started on the hunt proper. We had
arrived late the night before. Mr. and Mrs. Baker, having received a
telegram from Miss Marsh, were expecting us. They were a pleasant
couple, the man gnarled and pink-cheeked like a shriveled pippin, and
his wife a woman of vast proportions and true Devonshire calm.

Tired with our journey, including an eight-mile drive from the
station, we had retired at once to bed after a supper of roast
chicken, apple pie and Devonshire cream. We had now disposed of an
excellent breakfast, and were sitting in a small paneled room which
had been the late Mr. Marsh’s study and living-room. A roll-top desk
stuffed with papers, all neatly docketed, stood against the wall, and
a big leather armchair showed plainly that it had been its owner’s
constant resting-place. A big chintz-covered settee ran along the
opposite wall, and the deep low window-seats were covered with the
same faded chintz of an old-fashioned pattern.

“_Eh bien, mon ami_,” said Poirot, lighting one of his tiny
cigarettes, “we must map out our plan of campaign. Already I have made
a rough survey of the house, but I am of opinion that any clue will be
found in this room. We shall have to go through the documents in the
desk with meticulous care. Naturally I do not expect to find the will
among them, but it is likely that some apparently innocent paper may
conceal the clue to its hiding-place. But first we must have a little
information. Ring the bell, I pray of you.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

I did so. While we were waiting for it to be answered, Poirot walked
up and down, looking about him approvingly.

“A man of method, this Mr. Marsh. See how neatly the packets of papers
are docketed; and the key to each drawer has its ivory label—so has
the key of the china-cabinet on the wall. And see with what precision
the china within is arranged! It rejoices the heart. Nothing here
offends the eye—”

He came to an abrupt pause, as his eye was caught by the key of the
desk itself, to which a dirty envelope was affixed. Poirot frowned at
it, and withdrew it from the lock. On it were scrawled the words “_Key
of Roll-top Desk_” in a crabbed handwriting quite unlike the neat
superscriptures on the other keys.

“An alien note,” said Poirot, frowning. “I could swear that here we
have no longer the personality of Mr. Marsh. But who else has been in
the house? Only Miss Marsh; and she, if I mistake not, is also a young
lady of method and order.”

Baker came in answer to the bell.

“Will you fetch Madame your wife and answer a few questions?”

Baker departed, and in a few moments returned with Mrs. Baker, wiping
her hands on her apron and beaming all over her face.

In a few clear words, Poirot set forth the object of his mission. The
Bakers were immediately sympathetic.

“Us don’t want to see Miss Violet done out of what’s hers,” declared
the woman. “Cruel hard, ’twould be, for hospitals to get it all.”

Poirot proceeded with his questions. Yes, Mr. and Mrs. Baker
remembered perfectly witnessing the will. Baker had previously been
sent into the neighboring town to get two printed will-forms.

“Two?” said Poirot sharply.

“Yes sir, for safety like, I suppose, in case he should spoil one—and
sure enough, so he did do. Us had signed one—”

“What time of day was that?”

Baker scratched his head, but his wife was quicker.

“Why, to be sure, I’d just put the milk on for the cocoa at eleven.
Don’t ee remember? It had all boiled over on the stove when us got
back to kitchen.”

“And afterward?”

“’Twould be about an hour later. Us had to go in again. ‘I’ve made a
mistake,’ says old Master, ‘—had to tear the whole thing up. I’ll
trouble you to sign again.’ And us did. And afterward Master give us a
tidy sum of money each. ‘I’ve left you nothing in my will,’ says he,
‘but each year I live, you’ll have this to be a nest-egg when I’m
gone;’ and sure enough, so he did.”

Poirot reflected.

“After you had signed the second time, what did Mr. Marsh do? Do you
know?”

“Went out to the village to pay tradesmen’s books.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

That did not seem very promising. Poirot tried another tack. He held
out the key of the desk.

“Is that your master’s writing?”

I may have imagined it, but I fancied that a moment or two elapsed
before Baker replied: “Yes sir, it is.”

“He’s lying,” I thought. “But why?”

“Has your master let the house? Have there been any strangers in it
during the last three years?”

“No sir.”

“No visitors?”

“Only Miss Violet.”

“No strangers of any kind been inside this room?”

“No sir.”

“You forget the workmen, Jim,” his wife reminded him.

“Workmen?” Poirot wheeled round on her. “What workmen?”

The woman explained that about two years and a half ago workmen had
been in the house to do certain repairs. She was quite vague as to
what the repairs were. Her view seemed to be that the whole thing was
a fad of her master’s, and quite unnecessary. Part of the time the
workmen had been in the study, but what they had done there she could
not say, as her master had not let either of them into the room while
the work was in progress. Unfortunately they could not remember the
name of the firm employed, beyond the fact that it was a Plymouth one.

“We progress, Hastings,” said Poirot, rubbing his hands, as the Bakers
left the room. “Clearly he made a second will, and then had workmen
from Plymouth in to make a suitable hiding-place. Instead of wasting
time, taking up the floor and tapping the walls, we will go to
Plymouth.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

With a little trouble we were able to get the information we wanted.
And after one or two essays, we found the firm employed by Mr. Marsh.

Their employees had all been with them many years, and it was easy to
find the two men who had worked under Mr. Marsh’s orders. They
remembered the job perfectly. Among various other minor jobs, they had
taken up one of the bricks of the old-fashioned fireplace, made a
cavity beneath, and so cut the brick that it was impossible to see the
joint. By pressing on the second brick from the end, the whole thing
was raised. It had been quite a complicated piece of work, and the old
gentleman had been very fussy about it. Our informant was a man called
Coghan, a big, gaunt man with a grizzled mustache. He seemed an
intelligent fellow.

We returned to Crabtree Manor in high spirits, and locking the study
door, proceeded to put our newly acquired knowledge into effect. It
was impossible to see any sign on the bricks, but when we pressed in
the manner indicated, a deep cavity was at once disclosed.

Eagerly Poirot plunged in his hand. Suddenly his face fell from
complacent elation to consternation. All he held was a charred
fragment of stiff paper. But for it, the cavity was empty.

“_Sacré_,” cried Poirot angrily. “Some one has been here before us!”

We examined the scrap of paper anxiously. Clearly it was a fragment of
what we sought. A portion of Baker’s signature remained, but no
indication of what the terms of the will had been.

Poirot sat back on his heels.

“I understand it not,” he growled. “Who destroyed this? And what was
their object?”

“The Bakers?” I suggested.

“_Pourquoi?_ Neither will makes any provision for them, and they are
more likely to be kept on with Miss Marsh than if the place became the
property of a hospital. How could it be to anyone’s advantage to
destroy the will? The hospitals benefit, yes; but one cannot suspect
institutions!”

“Perhaps the old man changed his mind and destroyed it himself,” I
suggested.

Poirot rose to his feet, dusting his knees with his usual care.

“That may be,” he admitted. “One of your more sensible observations,
Hastings. Well, we can do no more here. We have done all that mortal
man can do. We have successfully pitted our wits against the late
Andrew Marsh, but unfortunately his niece is no better off for our
success.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

By driving to the station at once, we were just able to catch a train
to London, though not the principal express. Poirot was sad and
dissatisfied. For my part, I was tired and dozed in a corner.
Suddenly, as we were just moving out of Taunton, Poirot uttered a
piercing squeal.

“_Vite_, Hastings! Awake and jump. But jump, I say!”

Before I knew where I was, we were standing on the platform,
bareheaded and minus our valises, while the train disappeared into the
night. I was furious, but Poirot paid no attention.

“Imbecile that I have been!” he cried. “Triple imbecile! Not again
will I vaunt my little gray cells!”

“That’s a good job, at any rate,” I said grumpily. “But what is this
all about?”

As usual, when following out his own ideas, he paid absolutely no
attention to me.

“The tradesmen’s books, I have left them entirely out of account! Yes,
but where? Where? Never mind, I cannot be mistaken. We must return at
once.”

Easier said than done. We managed to get a slow train to Exeter, and
there Poirot hired a car. We arrived back at Crabtree Manor in the
small hours of the morning. I pass over the bewilderment of the Bakers
when we had at last aroused them. Paying no attention to anybody,
Poirot strode at once to the study.

“I have been, not a triple imbecile, but thirty-six times one, my
friend,” he deigned to remark. “Now, behold!”

Going straight to the desk, he drew out the key, and detached the
envelope from it. I stared at him stupidly. How could he possibly hope
to find a big will-form in that tiny envelope? With great care he cut
open the envelope, laying it out flat. Then he lighted the fire and
held the plain inside surface of the envelope to the flame. In a few
minutes faint characters began to appear.

“Look!” cried Poirot in triumph.

I looked. There were just a few lines of faint writing stating briefly
that he left everything to his niece Violet Marsh. It was dated March
25, twelve-thirty p. m., and witnessed by Albert Pike, confectioner,
and Jessie Pike, married woman.

“But is it legal?” I gasped.

“As far as I know, there is no law against writing your will in a
blend of disappearing and sympathetic ink. The intention of the
testator is clear, and the beneficiary is his only living relation.
But the cleverness of him! He foresaw every step that a searcher would
take, that I, miserable imbecile, took! He gets two will-forms, makes
the servants sign twice, then sallies out with his will written on the
inside of a dirty envelope, and a fountain pen containing his little
ink-mixture. On some excuse he gets the confectioner and his wife to
sign their names under his own signature; then he ties it to the key
of his desk and chuckles to himself. If his niece sees through his
little ruse, she will have justified her choice of life and elaborate
education and be thoroughly welcome to his money.”

“She didn’t see through it, did she?” I said slowly. “It seems rather
unfair. The old man really won.”

“But no, Hastings! It is _your_ wits that go astray. Miss Marsh proved
the astuteness of her wits and the value of the higher education for
women by at once putting the matter in _my_ hands. Always employ the
expert! She has amply proved her right to the money.”

I wonder—I very much wonder what old Andrew Marsh would have thought!


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the January, 1925 issue of
The Blue Book Magazine.]


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MISSING WILL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The murder of Roger Ackroyd
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The murder of Roger Ackroyd

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: October 2, 2022 [eBook #69087]
                Most recently updated: November 19, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Grosset & Dunlap, 1926

Credits: Emmanuel Ackerman, Robert Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MURDER OF ROGER ACKROYD ***





                             THE MURDER OF
                             ROGER ACKROYD

                                   BY

                            AGATHA CHRISTIE

                               AUTHOR OF
                        THE SECRET OF CHIMNEYS,
                     THE MURDER ON THE LINKS, Etc.

                             [Illustration]

                            GROSSET & DUNLAP
                         PUBLISHERS    NEW YORK


                            Copyright, 1926,
                    By DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, Inc.


                               To Punkie,
                    who likes an orthodox detective
                 story, murder, inquest, and suspicion
                     falling on every one in turn!







                               CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

      I  DR. SHEPPARD AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE                           1

     II  WHO’S WHO IN KING’S ABBOT                                     7

    III  THE MAN WHO GREW VEGETABLE MARROWS                           17

     IV  DINNER AT FERNLY                                             31

      V  MURDER                                                       49

     VI  THE TUNISIAN DAGGER                                          65

    VII  I LEARN MY NEIGHBOR’S PROFESSION                             75

   VIII  INSPECTOR RAGLAN IS CONFIDENT                                92

     IX  THE GOLDFISH POND                                           106

      X  THE PARLORMAID                                              118

     XI  POIROT PAYS A CALL                                          136

    XII  ROUND THE TABLE                                             145

   XIII  THE GOOSE QUILL                                             156

    XIV  MRS. ACKROYD                                                165

     XV  GEOFFREY RAYMOND                                            178

    XVI  AN EVENING AT MAH JONG                                      190

   XVII  PARKER                                                      202

  XVIII  CHARLES KENT                                                218

    XIX  FLORA ACKROYD                                               226

     XX  MISS RUSSELL                                                238

    XXI  THE PARAGRAPH IN THE PAPER                                  251

   XXII  URSULA’S STORY                                              260

  XXIII  POIROT’S LITTLE REUNION                                     269

   XXIV  RALPH PATON’S STORY                                         284

    XXV  THE WHOLE TRUTH                                             289

   XXVI  AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH                                   298

  XXVII  APOLOGIA                                                    303




                             THE MURDER OF
                             ROGER ACKROYD




                               CHAPTER I

                  DR. SHEPPARD AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE


Mrs. Ferrars died on the night of the 16th–17th September—a Thursday. I
was sent for at eight o’clock on the morning of Friday the 17th. There
was nothing to be done. She had been dead some hours.

It was just a few minutes after nine when I reached home once more. I
opened the front door with my latch-key, and purposely delayed a few
moments in the hall, hanging up my hat and the light overcoat that
I had deemed a wise precaution against the chill of an early autumn
morning. To tell the truth, I was considerably upset and worried. I am
not going to pretend that at that moment I foresaw the events of the
next few weeks. I emphatically did not do so. But my instinct told me
that there were stirring times ahead.

From the dining-room on my left there came the rattle of tea-cups and
the short, dry cough of my sister Caroline.

“Is that you, James?” she called.

An unnecessary question, since who else could it be? To tell the
truth, it was precisely my sister Caroline who was the cause of my few
minutes’ delay. The motto of the mongoose family, so Mr. Kipling tells
us, is: “Go and find out.” If Caroline ever adopts a crest, I should
certainly suggest a mongoose rampant. One might omit the first part
of the motto. Caroline can do any amount of finding out by sitting
placidly at home. I don’t know how she manages it, but there it is. I
suspect that the servants and the tradesmen constitute her Intelligence
Corps. When she goes out, it is not to gather in information, but to
spread it. At that, too, she is amazingly expert.

It was really this last named trait of hers which was causing me these
pangs of indecision. Whatever I told Caroline now concerning the demise
of Mrs. Ferrars would be common knowledge all over the village within
the space of an hour and a half. As a professional man, I naturally
aim at discretion. Therefore I have got into the habit of continually
withholding all information possible from my sister. She usually finds
out just the same, but I have the moral satisfaction of knowing that I
am in no way to blame.

Mrs. Ferrars’ husband died just over a year ago, and Caroline has
constantly asserted, without the least foundation for the assertion,
that his wife poisoned him.

She scorns my invariable rejoinder that Mr. Ferrars died of acute
gastritis, helped on by habitual over-indulgence in alcoholic
beverages. The symptoms of gastritis and arsenical poisoning are not,
I agree, unlike, but Caroline bases her accusation on quite different
lines.

“You’ve only got to look at her,” I have heard her say.

Mrs. Ferrars, though not in her first youth, was a very attractive
woman, and her clothes, though simple, always seemed to fit her very
well, but all the same, lots of women buy their clothes in Paris and
have not, on that account, necessarily poisoned their husbands.

As I stood hesitating in the hall, with all this passing through my
mind, Caroline’s voice came again, with a sharper note in it.

“What on earth are you doing out there, James? Why don’t you come and
get your breakfast?”

“Just coming, my dear,” I said hastily. “I’ve been hanging up my
overcoat.”

“You could have hung up half a dozen overcoats in this time.”

She was quite right. I could have.

I walked into the dining-room, gave Caroline the accustomed peck on the
cheek, and sat down to eggs and bacon. The bacon was rather cold.

“You’ve had an early call,” remarked Caroline.

“Yes,” I said. “King’s Paddock. Mrs. Ferrars.”

“I know,” said my sister.

“How did you know?”

“Annie told me.”

Annie is the house parlormaid. A nice girl, but an inveterate talker.

There was a pause. I continued to eat eggs and bacon. My sister’s nose,
which is long and thin, quivered a little at the tip, as it always does
when she is interested or excited over anything.

“Well?” she demanded.

“A bad business. Nothing to be done. Must have died in her sleep.”

“I know,” said my sister again.

This time I was annoyed.

“You can’t know,” I snapped. “I didn’t know myself until I got there,
and I haven’t mentioned it to a soul yet. If that girl Annie knows, she
must be a clairvoyant.”

“It wasn’t Annie who told me. It was the milkman. He had it from the
Ferrars’ cook.”

As I say, there is no need for Caroline to go out to get information.
She sits at home, and it comes to her.

My sister continued:

“What did she die of? Heart failure?”

“Didn’t the milkman tell you that?” I inquired sarcastically.

Sarcasm is wasted on Caroline. She takes it seriously and answers
accordingly.

“He didn’t know,” she explained.

After all, Caroline was bound to hear sooner or later. She might as
well hear from me.

“She died of an overdose of veronal. She’s been taking it lately for
sleeplessness. Must have taken too much.”

“Nonsense,” said Caroline immediately. “She took it on purpose. Don’t
tell me!”

It is odd how, when you have a secret belief of your own which you do
not wish to acknowledge, the voicing of it by some one else will rouse
you to a fury of denial. I burst immediately into indignant speech.

“There you go again,” I said. “Rushing along without rhyme or reason.
Why on earth should Mrs. Ferrars wish to commit suicide? A widow,
fairly young still, very well off, good health, and nothing to do but
enjoy life. It’s absurd.”

“Not at all. Even you must have noticed how different she has been
looking lately. It’s been coming on for the last six months. She’s
looked positively hag-ridden. And you have just admitted that she
hasn’t been able to sleep.”

“What is your diagnosis?” I demanded coldly. “An unfortunate love
affair, I suppose?”

My sister shook her head.

“_Remorse_,” she said, with great gusto.

“Remorse?”

“Yes. You never would believe me when I told you she poisoned her
husband. I’m more than ever convinced of it now.”

“I don’t think you’re very logical,” I objected. “Surely if a woman
committed a crime like murder, she’d be sufficiently cold-blooded to
enjoy the fruits of it without any weak-minded sentimentality such as
repentance.”

Caroline shook her head.

“There probably are women like that—but Mrs. Ferrars wasn’t one of
them. She was a mass of nerves. An overmastering impulse drove her on
to get rid of her husband because she was the sort of person who simply
can’t endure suffering of any kind, and there’s no doubt that the wife
of a man like Ashley Ferrars must have had to suffer a good deal——”

I nodded.

“And ever since she’s been haunted by what she did. I can’t help
feeling sorry for her.”

I don’t think Caroline ever felt sorry for Mrs. Ferrars whilst she was
alive. Now that she has gone where (presumably) Paris frocks can no
longer be worn, Caroline is prepared to indulge in the softer emotions
of pity and comprehension.

I told her firmly that her whole idea was nonsense. I was all the more
firm because I secretly agreed with some part, at least, of what she
had said. But it is all wrong that Caroline should arrive at the truth
simply by a kind of inspired guesswork. I wasn’t going to encourage
that sort of thing. She will go round the village airing her views, and
every one will think that she is doing so on medical data supplied by
me. Life is very trying.

“Nonsense,” said Caroline, in reply to my strictures. “You’ll see. Ten
to one she’s left a letter confessing everything.”

“She didn’t leave a letter of any kind,” I said sharply, and not seeing
where the admission was going to land me.

“Oh!” said Caroline. “So you _did_ inquire about that, did you? I
believe, James, that in your heart of hearts, you think very much as I
do. You’re a precious old humbug.”

“One always has to take the possibility of suicide into consideration,”
I said repressively.

“Will there be an inquest?”

“There may be. It all depends. If I am able to declare myself
absolutely satisfied that the overdose was taken accidentally, an
inquest might be dispensed with.”

“And are you absolutely satisfied?” asked my sister shrewdly.

I did not answer, but got up from table.




                              CHAPTER II

                       WHO’S WHO IN KING’S ABBOT


Before I proceed further with what I said to Caroline and what Caroline
said to me, it might be as well to give some idea of what I should
describe as our local geography. Our village, King’s Abbot, is, I
imagine, very much like any other village. Our big town is Cranchester,
nine miles away. We have a large railway station, a small post office,
and two rival “General Stores.” Able-bodied men are apt to leave the
place early in life, but we are rich in unmarried ladies and retired
military officers. Our hobbies and recreations can be summed up in the
one word, “gossip.”

There are only two houses of any importance in King’s Abbot. One
is King’s Paddock, left to Mrs. Ferrars by her late husband. The
other, Fernly Park, is owned by Roger Ackroyd. Ackroyd has always
interested me by being a man more impossibly like a country squire
than any country squire could really be. He reminds one of the
red-faced sportsmen who always appeared early in the first act of an
old-fashioned musical comedy, the setting being the village green. They
usually sang a song about going up to London. Nowadays we have revues,
and the country squire has died out of musical fashion.

Of course, Ackroyd is not really a country squire. He is an immensely
successful manufacturer of (I think) wagon wheels. He is a man of
nearly fifty years of age, rubicund of face and genial of manner.
He is hand and glove with the vicar, subscribes liberally to parish
funds (though rumor has it that he is extremely mean in personal
expenditure), encourages cricket matches, Lads’ Clubs, and Disabled
Soldiers’ Institutes. He is, in fact, the life and soul of our peaceful
village of King’s Abbot.

Now when Roger Ackroyd was a lad of twenty-one, he fell in love with,
and married, a beautiful woman some five or six years his senior. Her
name was Paton, and she was a widow with one child. The history of the
marriage was short and painful. To put it bluntly, Mrs. Ackroyd was
a dipsomaniac. She succeeded in drinking herself into her grave four
years after her marriage.

In the years that followed, Ackroyd showed no disposition to make a
second matrimonial adventure. His wife’s child by her first marriage
was only seven years old when his mother died. He is now twenty-five.
Ackroyd has always regarded him as his own son, and has brought him up
accordingly, but he has been a wild lad and a continual source of worry
and trouble to his stepfather. Nevertheless we are all very fond of
Ralph Paton in King’s Abbot. He is such a good-looking youngster for
one thing.

As I said before, we are ready enough to gossip in our village.
Everybody noticed from the first that Ackroyd and Mrs. Ferrars got on
very well together. After her husband’s death, the intimacy became
more marked. They were always seen about together, and it was freely
conjectured that at the end of her period of mourning, Mrs. Ferrars
would become Mrs. Roger Ackroyd. It was felt, indeed, that there was a
certain fitness in the thing. Roger Ackroyd’s wife had admittedly died
of drink. Ashley Ferrars had been a drunkard for many years before his
death. It was only fitting that these two victims of alcoholic excess
should make up to each other for all that they had previously endured
at the hands of their former spouses.

The Ferrars only came to live here just over a year ago, but a halo of
gossip has surrounded Ackroyd for many years past. All the time that
Ralph Paton was growing up to manhood, a series of lady housekeepers
presided over Ackroyd’s establishment, and each in turn was regarded
with lively suspicion by Caroline and her cronies. It is not too
much to say that for at least fifteen years the whole village has
confidently expected Ackroyd to marry one of his housekeepers. The last
of them, a redoubtable lady called Miss Russell, has reigned undisputed
for five years, twice as long as any of her predecessors. It is felt
that but for the advent of Mrs. Ferrars, Ackroyd could hardly have
escaped. That—and one other factor—the unexpected arrival of a widowed
sister-in-law with her daughter from Canada. Mrs. Cecil Ackroyd, widow
of Ackroyd’s ne’er-do-well younger brother, has taken up her residence
at Fernly Park, and has succeeded, according to Caroline, in putting
Miss Russell in her proper place.

I don’t know exactly what a “proper place” constitutes—it sounds chilly
and unpleasant—but I know that Miss Russell goes about with pinched
lips, and what I can only describe as an acid smile, and that she
professes the utmost sympathy for “poor Mrs. Ackroyd—dependent on the
charity of her husband’s brother. The bread of charity is so bitter, is
it not? _I_ should be quite miserable if I did not work for my living.”

I don’t know what Mrs. Cecil Ackroyd thought of the Ferrars affair when
it came on the tapis. It was clearly to her advantage that Ackroyd
should remain unmarried. She was always very charming—not to say
gushing—to Mrs. Ferrars when they met. Caroline says that proves less
than nothing.

Such have been our preoccupations in King’s Abbot for the last few
years. We have discussed Ackroyd and his affairs from every standpoint.
Mrs. Ferrars has fitted into her place in the scheme.

Now there has been a rearrangement of the kaleidoscope. From a mild
discussion of probable wedding presents, we have been jerked into the
midst of tragedy.

Revolving these and sundry other matters in my mind, I went
mechanically on my round. I had no cases of special interest to attend,
which was, perhaps, as well, for my thoughts returned again and again
to the mystery of Mrs. Ferrars’s death. Had she taken her own life?
Surely, if she had done so, she would have left some word behind to
say what she contemplated doing? Women, in my experience, if they once
reach the determination to commit suicide, usually wish to reveal the
state of mind that led to the fatal action. They covet the limelight.

When had I last seen her? Not for over a week. Her manner then had been
normal enough considering—well—considering everything.

Then I suddenly remembered that I had seen her, though not to speak
to, only yesterday. She had been walking with Ralph Paton, and I had
been surprised because I had had no idea that he was likely to be in
King’s Abbot. I thought, indeed, that he had quarreled finally with
his stepfather. Nothing had been seen of him down here for nearly six
months. They had been walking along, side by side, their heads close
together, and she had been talking very earnestly.

I think I can safely say that it was at this moment that a foreboding
of the future first swept over me. Nothing tangible as yet—but a vague
premonition of the way things were setting. That earnest _tête-à-tête_
between Ralph Paton and Mrs. Ferrars the day before struck me
disagreeably.

I was still thinking of it when I came face to face with Roger Ackroyd.

“Sheppard!” he exclaimed. “Just the man I wanted to get hold of. This
is a terrible business.”

“You’ve heard then?”

He nodded. He had felt the blow keenly, I could see. His big red cheeks
seemed to have fallen in, and he looked a positive wreck of his usual
jolly, healthy self.

“It’s worse than you know,” he said quietly. “Look here, Sheppard, I’ve
got to talk to you. Can you come back with me now?”

“Hardly. I’ve got three patients to see still, and I must be back by
twelve to see my surgery patients.”

“Then this afternoon—no, better still, dine to-night. At 7.30? Will
that suit you?”

“Yes—I can manage that all right. What’s wrong? Is it Ralph?”

I hardly knew why I said that—except, perhaps, that it had so often
been Ralph.

Ackroyd stared blankly at me as though he hardly understood. I began to
realize that there must be something very wrong indeed somewhere. I had
never seen Ackroyd so upset before.

“Ralph?” he said vaguely. “Oh! no, it’s not Ralph. Ralph’s in
London——Damn! Here’s old Miss Ganett coming. I don’t want to have to
talk to her about this ghastly business. See you to-night, Sheppard.
Seven-thirty.”

I nodded, and he hurried away, leaving me wondering. Ralph in London?
But he had certainly been in King’s Abbot the preceding afternoon. He
must have gone back to town last night or early this morning, and yet
Ackroyd’s manner had conveyed quite a different impression. He had
spoken as though Ralph had not been near the place for months.

I had no time to puzzle the matter out further. Miss Ganett was upon
me, thirsting for information. Miss Ganett has all the characteristics
of my sister Caroline, but she lacks that unerring aim in jumping to
conclusions which lends a touch of greatness to Caroline’s maneuvers.
Miss Ganett was breathless and interrogatory.

Wasn’t it sad about poor dear Mrs. Ferrars? A lot of people were saying
she had been a confirmed drug-taker for years. So wicked the way
people went about saying things. And yet, the worst of it was, there
was usually a grain of truth somewhere in these wild statements. No
smoke without fire! They were saying too that Mr. Ackroyd had found
out about it, and had broken off the engagement—because there _was_ an
engagement. She, Miss Ganett, had proof positive of that. Of course _I_
must know all about it—doctors always did—but they never tell?

And all this with a sharp beady eye on me to see how I reacted to
these suggestions. Fortunately long association with Caroline has led
me to preserve an impassive countenance, and to be ready with small
non-committal remarks.

On this occasion I congratulated Miss Ganett on not joining in
ill-natured gossip. Rather a neat counterattack, I thought. It left
her in difficulties, and before she could pull herself together, I had
passed on.

I went home thoughtful, to find several patients waiting for me in the
surgery.

I had dismissed the last of them, as I thought, and was just
contemplating a few minutes in the garden before lunch when I perceived
one more patient waiting for me. She rose and came towards me as I
stood somewhat surprised.

I don’t know why I should have been, except that there is a suggestion
of cast iron about Miss Russell, a something that is above the ills of
the flesh.

Ackroyd’s housekeeper is a tall woman, handsome but forbidding in
appearance. She has a stern eye, and lips that shut tightly, and I feel
that if I were an under housemaid or a kitchenmaid I should run for my
life whenever I heard her coming.

“Good morning, Dr. Sheppard,” said Miss Russell. “I should be much
obliged if you would take a look at my knee.”

I took a look, but, truth to tell, I was very little wiser when I had
done so. Miss Russell’s account of vague pains was so unconvincing that
with a woman of less integrity of character I should have suspected a
trumped-up tale. It did cross my mind for one moment that Miss Russell
might have deliberately invented this affection of the knee in order
to pump me on the subject of Mrs. Ferrars’s death, but I soon saw that
there, at least, I had misjudged her. She made a brief reference to the
tragedy, nothing more. Yet she certainly seemed disposed to linger and
chat.

“Well, thank you very much for this bottle of liniment, doctor,” she
said at last. “Not that I believe it will do the least good.”

I didn’t think it would either, but I protested in duty bound. After
all, it couldn’t do any harm, and one must stick up for the tools of
one’s trade.

“I don’t believe in all these drugs,” said Miss Russell, her eyes
sweeping over my array of bottles disparagingly. “Drugs do a lot of
harm. Look at the cocaine habit.”

“Well, as far as that goes——”

“It’s very prevalent in high society.”

I’m sure Miss Russell knows far more about high society than I do. I
didn’t attempt to argue with her.

“Just tell me this, doctor,” said Miss Russell. “Suppose you are really
a slave of the drug habit. Is there any cure?”

One cannot answer a question like that offhand. I gave her a short
lecture on the subject, and she listened with close attention. I still
suspected her of seeking information about Mrs. Ferrars.

“Now, veronal, for instance——” I proceeded.

But, strangely enough, she didn’t seem interested in veronal. Instead
she changed the subject, and asked me if it was true that there were
certain poisons so rare as to baffle detection.

“Ah!” I said. “You’ve been reading detective stories.”

She admitted that she had.

“The essence of a detective story,” I said, “is to have a rare
poison—if possible something from South America, that nobody has ever
heard of—something that one obscure tribe of savages use to poison
their arrows with. Death is instantaneous, and Western science is
powerless to detect it. That is the kind of thing you mean?”

“Yes. Is there really such a thing?”

I shook my head regretfully.

“I’m afraid there isn’t. There’s _curare_, of course.”

I told her a good deal about curare, but she seemed to have lost
interest once more. She asked me if I had any in my poison cupboard,
and when I replied in the negative I fancy I fell in her estimation.

She said she must be getting back, and I saw her out at the surgery
door just as the luncheon gong went.

I should never have suspected Miss Russell of a fondness for detective
stories. It pleases me very much to think of her stepping out of the
housekeeper’s room to rebuke a delinquent housemaid, and then returning
to a comfortable perusal of _The Mystery of the Seventh Death_, or
something of the kind.




                              CHAPTER III

                  THE MAN WHO GREW VEGETABLE MARROWS


I told Caroline at lunch time that I should be dining at Fernly. She
expressed no objection—on the contrary——

“Excellent,” she said. “You’ll hear all about it. By the way, what is
the trouble with Ralph?”

“With Ralph?” I said, surprised; “there’s isn’t any.”

“Then why is he staying at the Three Boars instead of at Fernly Park?”

I did not for a minute question Caroline’s statement that Ralph Paton
was staying at the local inn. That Caroline said so was enough for me.

“Ackroyd told me he was in London,” I said. In the surprise of
the moment I departed from my valuable rule of never parting with
information.

“Oh!” said Caroline. I could see her nose twitching as she worked on
this.

“He arrived at the Three Boars yesterday morning,” she said. “And he’s
still there. Last night he was out with a girl.”

That did not surprise me in the least. Ralph, I should say, is out
with a girl most nights of his life. But I did rather wonder that he
chose to indulge in the pastime in King’s Abbot instead of in the gay
metropolis.

“One of the barmaids?” I asked.

“No. That’s just it. He went out to meet her. I don’t know who she is.”

(Bitter for Caroline to have to admit such a thing.)

“But I can guess,” continued my indefatigable sister.

I waited patiently.

“His cousin.”

“Flora Ackroyd?” I exclaimed in surprise.

Flora Ackroyd is, of course, no relation whatever really to Ralph
Paton, but Ralph has been looked upon for so long as practically
Ackroyd’s own son, that cousinship is taken for granted.

“Flora Ackroyd,” said my sister.

“But why not go to Fernly if he wanted to see her?”

“Secretly engaged,” said Caroline, with immense enjoyment. “Old Ackroyd
won’t hear of it, and they have to meet this way.”

I saw a good many flaws in Caroline’s theory, but I forbore to point
them out to her. An innocent remark about our new neighbor created a
diversion.

The house next door, The Larches, has recently been taken by a
stranger. To Caroline’s extreme annoyance, she has not been able
to find out anything about him, except that he is a foreigner. The
Intelligence Corps has proved a broken reed. Presumably the man has
milk and vegetables and joints of meat and occasional whitings just
like everybody else, but none of the people who make it their business
to supply these things seem to have acquired any information. His name,
apparently, is Mr. Porrott—a name which conveys an odd feeling of
unreality. The one thing we do know about him is that he is interested
in the growing of vegetable marrows.

But that is certainly not the sort of information that Caroline is
after. She wants to know where he comes from, what he does, whether he
is married, what his wife was, or is, like, whether he has children,
what his mother’s maiden name was—and so on. Somebody very like
Caroline must have invented the questions on passports, I think.

“My dear Caroline,” I said. “There’s no doubt at all about what the
man’s profession has been. He’s a retired hairdresser. Look at that
mustache of his.”

Caroline dissented. She said that if the man was a hairdresser, he
would have wavy hair—not straight. All hairdressers did.

I cited several hairdressers personally known to me who had straight
hair, but Caroline refused to be convinced.

“I can’t make him out at all,” she said in an aggrieved voice. “I
borrowed some garden tools the other day, and he was most polite, but
I couldn’t get anything out of him. I asked him point blank at last
whether he was a Frenchman, and he said he wasn’t—and somehow I didn’t
like to ask him any more.”

I began to be more interested in our mysterious neighbor. A man who
is capable of shutting up Caroline and sending her, like the Queen of
Sheba, empty away must be something of a personality.

“I believe,” said Caroline, “that he’s got one of those new vacuum
cleaners——”

I saw a meditated loan and the opportunity of further questioning
gleaming from her eye. I seized the chance to escape into the garden.
I am rather fond of gardening. I was busily exterminating dandelion
roots when a shout of warning sounded from close by and a heavy body
whizzed by my ear and fell at my feet with a repellant squelch. It was
a vegetable marrow!

I looked up angrily. Over the wall, to my left, there appeared a face.
An egg-shaped head, partially covered with suspiciously black hair, two
immense mustaches, and a pair of watchful eyes. It was our mysterious
neighbor, Mr. Porrott.

He broke at once into fluent apologies.

“I demand of you a thousand pardons, monsieur. I am without defense.
For some months now I cultivate the marrows. This morning suddenly
I enrage myself with these marrows. I send them to promenade
themselves—alas! not only mentally but physically. I seize the biggest.
I hurl him over the wall. Monsieur, I am ashamed. I prostrate myself.”

Before such profuse apologies, my anger was forced to melt. After
all, the wretched vegetable hadn’t hit me. But I sincerely hoped that
throwing large vegetables over walls was not our new friend’s hobby.
Such a habit could hardly endear him to us as a neighbor.

The strange little man seemed to read my thoughts.

“Ah! no,” he exclaimed. “Do not disquiet yourself. It is not with me a
habit. But can you figure to yourself, monsieur, that a man may work
towards a certain object, may labor and toil to attain a certain kind
of leisure and occupation, and then find that, after all, he yearns
for the old busy days, and the old occupations that he thought himself
so glad to leave?”

“Yes,” I said slowly. “I fancy that that is a common enough occurrence.
I myself am perhaps an instance. A year ago I came into a legacy—enough
to enable me to realize a dream. I have always wanted to travel, to see
the world. Well, that was a year ago, as I said, and—I am still here.”

My little neighbor nodded.

“The chains of habit. We work to attain an object, and the object
gained, we find that what we miss is the daily toil. And mark you,
monsieur, my work was interesting work. The most interesting work there
is in the world.”

“Yes?” I said encouragingly. For the moment the spirit of Caroline was
strong within me.

“The study of human nature, monsieur!”

“Just so,” I said kindly.

Clearly a retired hairdresser. Who knows the secrets of human nature
better than a hairdresser?

“Also, I had a friend—a friend who for many years never left my side.
Occasionally of an imbecility to make one afraid, nevertheless he was
very dear to me. Figure to yourself that I miss even his stupidity.
His _naïveté_, his honest outlook, the pleasure of delighting and
surprising him by my superior gifts—all these I miss more than I can
tell you.”

“He died?” I asked sympathetically.

“Not so. He lives and flourishes—but on the other side of the world. He
is now in the Argentine.”

“In the Argentine,” I said enviously.

I have always wanted to go to South America. I sighed, and then
looked up to find Mr. Porrott eyeing me sympathetically. He seemed an
understanding little man.

“You will go there, yes?” he asked.

I shook my head with a sigh.

“I could have gone,” I said, “a year ago. But I was foolish—and worse
than foolish—greedy. I risked the substance for the shadow.”

“I comprehend,” said Mr. Porrott. “You speculated?”

I nodded mournfully, but in spite of myself I felt secretly
entertained. This ridiculous little man was so portentously solemn.

“Not the Porcupine Oilfields?” he asked suddenly.

I stared.

“I thought of them, as a matter of fact, but in the end I plumped for a
gold mine in Western Australia.”

My neighbor was regarding me with a strange expression which I could
not fathom.

“It is Fate,” he said at last.

“What is Fate?” I asked irritably.

“That I should live next to a man who seriously considers Porcupine
Oilfields, and also West Australian Gold Mines. Tell me, have you also
a penchant for auburn hair?”

I stared at him open-mouthed, and he burst out laughing.

“No, no, it is not the insanity that I suffer from. Make your mind
easy. It was a foolish question that I put to you there, for, see you,
my friend of whom I spoke was a young man, a man who thought all women
good, and most of them beautiful. But you are a man of middle age, a
doctor, a man who knows the folly and the vanity of most things in this
life of ours. Well, well, we are neighbors. I beg of you to accept and
present to your excellent sister my best marrow.”

He stooped, and with a flourish produced an immense specimen of the
tribe, which I duly accepted in the spirit in which it was offered.

“Indeed,” said the little man cheerfully, “this has not been a wasted
morning. I have made the acquaintance of a man who in some ways
resembles my far-off friend. By the way, I should like to ask you a
question. You doubtless know every one in this tiny village. Who is the
young man with the very dark hair and eyes, and the handsome face. He
walks with his head flung back, and an easy smile on his lips?”

The description left me in no doubt.

“That must be Captain Ralph Paton,” I said slowly.

“I have not seen him about here before?”

“No, he has not been here for some time. But he is the son—adopted son,
rather—of Mr. Ackroyd of Fernly Park.”

My neighbor made a slight gesture of impatience.

“Of course, I should have guessed. Mr. Ackroyd spoke of him many times.”

“You know Mr. Ackroyd?” I said, slightly surprised.

“Mr. Ackroyd knew me in London—when I was at work there. I have asked
him to say nothing of my profession down here.”

“I see,” I said, rather amused by this patent snobbery, as I thought it.

But the little man went on with an almost grandiloquent smirk.

“One prefers to remain incognito. I am not anxious for notoriety. I
have not even troubled to correct the local version of my name.”

“Indeed,” I said, not knowing quite what to say.

“Captain Ralph Paton,” mused Mr. Porrott. “And so he is engaged to Mr.
Ackroyd’s niece, the charming Miss Flora.”

“Who told you so?” I asked, very much surprised.

“Mr. Ackroyd. About a week ago. He is very pleased about it—has long
desired that such a thing should come to pass, or so I understood
from him. I even believe that he brought some pressure to bear upon
the young man. That is never wise. A young man should marry to please
himself—not to please a stepfather from whom he has expectations.”

My ideas were completely upset. I could not see Ackroyd taking a
hairdresser into his confidence, and discussing the marriage of his
niece and stepson with him. Ackroyd extends a genial patronage to the
lower orders, but he has a very great sense of his own dignity. I began
to think that Porrott couldn’t be a hairdresser after all.

To hide my confusion, I said the first thing that came into my head.

“What made you notice Ralph Paton? His good looks?”

“No, not that alone—though he is unusually good-looking for an
Englishman—what your lady novelists would call a Greek God. No, there
was something about that young man that I did not understand.”

He said the last sentence in a musing tone of voice which made an
indefinable impression upon me. It was as though he was summing up the
boy by the light of some inner knowledge that I did not share. It was
that impression that was left with me, for at that moment my sister’s
voice called me from the house.

I went in. Caroline had her hat on, and had evidently just come in from
the village. She began without preamble.

“I met Mr. Ackroyd.”

“Yes?” I said.

“I stopped him, of course, but he seemed in a great hurry, and anxious
to get away.”

I have no doubt but that that was the case. He would feel towards
Caroline much as he had felt towards Miss Ganett earlier in the
day—perhaps more so. Caroline is less easy to shake off.

“I asked him at once about Ralph. He was absolutely astonished. Had no
idea the boy was down here. He actually said he thought I must have
made a mistake. I! A mistake!”

“Ridiculous,” I said. “He ought to have known you better.”

“Then he went on to tell me that Ralph and Flora are engaged.”

“I know that too,” I interrupted, with modest pride.

“Who told you?”

“Our new neighbor.”

Caroline visibly wavered for a second or two, much as a roulette ball
might coyly hover between two numbers. Then she declined the tempting
red herring.

“I told Mr. Ackroyd that Ralph was staying at the Three Boars.”

“Caroline,” I said, “do you never reflect that you might do a lot of
harm with this habit of yours of repeating everything indiscriminately?”

“Nonsense,” said my sister. “People ought to know things. I consider it
my duty to tell them. Mr. Ackroyd was very grateful to me.”

“Well?” I said, for there was clearly more to come.

“I think he went straight off to the Three Boars, but if so he didn’t
find Ralph there.”

“No?”

“No. Because as I was coming back through the wood——”

“Coming back through the wood?” I interrupted.

Caroline had the grace to blush.

“It was such a lovely day,” she exclaimed. “I thought I would make a
little round. The woods with their autumnal tints are so perfect at
this time of year.”

Caroline does not care a hang for woods at any time of year. Normally
she regards them as places where you get your feet damp, and where all
kinds of unpleasant things may drop on your head. No, it was good sound
mongoose instinct which took her to our local wood. It is the only
place adjacent to the village of King’s Abbot where you can talk with
a young woman unseen by the whole of the village. It adjoins the Park
of Fernly.

“Well,” I said, “go on.”

“As I say, I was just coming back through the wood when I heard voices.”

Caroline paused.

“Yes?”

“One was Ralph Paton’s—I knew it at once. The other was a girl’s. Of
course I didn’t mean to listen——”

“Of course not,” I interjected, with patent sarcasm—which was, however,
wasted on Caroline.

“But I simply couldn’t help overhearing. The girl said something—I
didn’t quite catch what it was, and Ralph answered. He sounded very
angry. ‘My dear girl,’ he said. ‘Don’t you realize that it is quite
on the cards the old man will cut me off with a shilling? He’s been
pretty fed up with me for the last few years. A little more would do
it. And we need the dibs, my dear. I shall be a very rich man when
the old fellow pops off. He’s mean as they make ’em, but he’s rolling
in money really. I don’t want him to go altering his will. You leave
it to me, and don’t worry.’ Those were his exact words. I remember
them perfectly. Unfortunately, just then I stepped on a dry twig or
something, and they lowered their voices and moved away. I couldn’t, of
course, go rushing after them, so wasn’t able to see who the girl was.”

“That must have been most vexing,” I said. “I suppose, though, you
hurried on to the Three Boars, felt faint, and went into the bar for a
glass of brandy, and so were able to see if both the barmaids were on
duty?”

“It wasn’t a barmaid,” said Caroline unhesitatingly. “In fact, I’m
almost sure that it was Flora Ackroyd, only——”

“Only it doesn’t seem to make sense,” I agreed.

“But if it wasn’t Flora, who could it have been?”

Rapidly my sister ran over a list of maidens living in the
neighborhood, with profuse reasons for and against.

When she paused for breath, I murmured something about a patient, and
slipped out.

I proposed to make my way to the Three Boars. It seemed likely that
Ralph Paton would have returned there by now.

I knew Ralph very well—better, perhaps, than any one else in King’s
Abbot, for I had known his mother before him, and therefore I
understood much in him that puzzled others. He was, to a certain
extent, the victim of heredity. He had not inherited his mother’s
fatal propensity for drink, but nevertheless he had in him a strain
of weakness. As my new friend of this morning had declared, he was
extraordinarily handsome. Just on six feet, perfectly proportioned,
with the easy grace of an athlete, he was dark, like his mother,
with a handsome, sunburnt face always ready to break into a smile.
Ralph Paton was of those born to charm easily and without effort. He
was self-indulgent and extravagant, with no veneration for anything
on earth, but he was lovable nevertheless, and his friends were all
devoted to him.

Could I do anything with the boy? I thought I could.

On inquiry at the Three Boars I found that Captain Paton had just come
in. I went up to his room and entered unannounced.

For a moment, remembering what I had heard and seen, I was doubtful of
my reception, but I need have had no misgivings.

“Why, it’s Sheppard! Glad to see you.”

He came forward to meet me, hand outstretched, a sunny smile lighting
up his face.

“The one person I am glad to see in this infernal place.”

I raised my eyebrows.

“What’s the place been doing?”

He gave a vexed laugh.

“It’s a long story. Things haven’t been going well with me, doctor. But
have a drink, won’t you?”

“Thanks,” I said, “I will.”

He pressed the bell, then, coming back, threw himself into a chair.

“Not to mince matters,” he said gloomily, “I’m in the devil of a mess.
In fact, I haven’t the least idea what to do next.”

“What’s the matter?” I asked sympathetically.

“It’s my confounded stepfather.”

“What has he done?”

“It isn’t what he’s done yet, but what he’s likely to do.”

The bell was answered, and Ralph ordered the drinks. When the man had
gone again, he sat hunched in the arm-chair, frowning to himself.

“Is it really—serious?” I asked.

He nodded.

“I’m fairly up against it this time,” he said soberly.

The unusual ring of gravity in his voice told me that he spoke the
truth. It took a good deal to make Ralph grave.

“In fact,” he continued, “I can’t see my way ahead.... I’m damned if I
can.”

“If I could help——” I suggested diffidently.

But he shook his head very decidedly.

“Good of you, doctor. But I can’t let you in on this. I’ve got to play
a lone hand.”

He was silent a minute and then repeated in a slightly different tone
of voice:—

“Yes—I’ve got to play a lone hand....”




                              CHAPTER IV

                           DINNER AT FERNLY


It was just a few minutes before half-past seven when I rang the
front door bell of Fernly Park. The door was opened with admirable
promptitude by Parker, the butler.

The night was such a fine one that I had preferred to come on foot. I
stepped into the big square hall and Parker relieved me of my overcoat.
Just then Ackroyd’s secretary, a pleasant young fellow by the name of
Raymond, passed through the hall on his way to Ackroyd’s study, his
hands full of papers.

“Good-evening, doctor. Coming to dine? Or is this a professional call?”

The last was in allusion to my black bag, which I had laid down on the
oak chest.

I explained that I expected a summons to a confinement case at any
moment, and so had come out prepared for an emergency call. Raymond
nodded, and went on his way, calling over his shoulder:—

“Go into the drawing-room. You know the way. The ladies will be down in
a minute. I must just take these papers to Mr. Ackroyd, and I’ll tell
him you’re here.”

On Raymond’s appearance Parker had withdrawn, so I was alone in the
hall. I settled my tie, glanced in a large mirror which hung there, and
crossed to the door directly facing me, which was, as I knew, the door
of the drawing-room.

I noticed, just as I was turning the handle, a sound from within—the
shutting down of a window, I took it to be. I noted it, I may say,
quite mechanically, without attaching any importance to it at the time.

I opened the door and walked in. As I did so, I almost collided with
Miss Russell, who was just coming out. We both apologized.

For the first time I found myself appraising the housekeeper and
thinking what a handsome woman she must once have been—indeed, as far
as that goes, still was. Her dark hair was unstreaked with gray, and
when she had a color, as she had at this minute, the stern quality of
her looks was not so apparent.

Quite subconsciously I wondered whether she had been out, for she was
breathing hard, as though she had been running.

“I’m afraid I’m a few minutes early,” I said.

“Oh! I don’t think so. It’s gone half-past seven, Dr. Sheppard.” She
paused a minute before saying, “I—didn’t know you were expected to
dinner to-night. Mr. Ackroyd didn’t mention it.”

I received a vague impression that my dining there displeased her in
some way, but I couldn’t imagine why.

“How’s the knee?” I inquired.

“Much the same, thank you, doctor. I must be going now. Mrs. Ackroyd
will be down in a moment. I—I only came in here to see if the flowers
were all right.”

She passed quickly out of the room. I strolled to the window,
wondering at her evident desire to justify her presence in the room. As
I did so, I saw what, of course, I might have known all the time had
I troubled to give my mind to it, namely, that the windows were long
French ones opening on the terrace. The sound I had heard, therefore,
could not have been that of a window being shut down.

Quite idly, and more to distract my mind from painful thoughts than for
any other reason, I amused myself by trying to guess what could have
caused the sound in question.

Coals on the fire? No, that was not the kind of noise at all. A drawer
of the bureau pushed in? No, not that.

Then my eye was caught by what, I believe, is called a silver table,
the lid of which lifts, and through the glass of which you can see the
contents. I crossed over to it, studying the things. There were one
or two pieces of old silver, a baby shoe belonging to King Charles
the First, some Chinese jade figures, and quite a number of African
implements and curios. Wanting to examine one of the jade figures more
closely, I lifted the lid. It slipped through my fingers and fell.

At once I recognized the sound I had heard. It was this same table lid
being shut down gently and carefully. I repeated the action once or
twice for my own satisfaction. Then I lifted the lid to scrutinize the
contents more closely.

I was still bending over the open silver table when Flora Ackroyd came
into the room.

Quite a lot of people do not like Flora Ackroyd, but nobody can help
admiring her. And to her friends she can be very charming. The first
thing that strikes you about her is her extraordinary fairness. She has
the real Scandinavian pale gold hair. Her eyes are blue—blue as the
waters of a Norwegian fiord, and her skin is cream and roses. She has
square, boyish shoulders and slight hips. And to a jaded medical man it
is very refreshing to come across such perfect health.

A simple straight-forward English girl—I may be old-fashioned, but I
think the genuine article takes a lot of beating.

Flora joined me by the silver table, and expressed heretical doubts as
to King Charles I ever having worn the baby shoe.

“And anyway,” continued Miss Flora, “all this making a fuss about
things because some one wore or used them seems to me all nonsense.
They’re not wearing or using them now. The pen that George Eliot wrote
_The Mill on the Floss_ with—that sort of thing—well, it’s only just a
pen after all. If you’re really keen on George Eliot, why not get _The
Mill on the Floss_ in a cheap edition and read it.”

“I suppose you never read such old out-of-date stuff, Miss Flora?”

“You’re wrong, Dr. Sheppard. I love _The Mill on the Floss_.”

I was rather pleased to hear it. The things young women read nowadays
and profess to enjoy positively frighten me.

“You haven’t congratulated me yet, Dr. Sheppard,” said Flora. “Haven’t
you heard?”

She held out her left hand. On the third finger of it was an
exquisitely set single pearl.

“I’m going to marry Ralph, you know,” she went on. “Uncle is very
pleased. It keeps me in the family, you see.”

I took both her hands in mine.

“My dear,” I said, “I hope you’ll be very happy.”

“We’ve been engaged for about a month,” continued Flora in her cool
voice, “but it was only announced yesterday. Uncle is going to do up
Cross-stones, and give it to us to live in, and we’re going to pretend
to farm. Really, we shall hunt all the winter, town for the season, and
then go yachting. I love the sea. And, of course, I shall take a great
interest in the parish affairs, and attend all the Mothers’ Meetings.”

Just then Mrs. Ackroyd rustled in, full of apologies for being late.

I am sorry to say I detest Mrs. Ackroyd. She is all chains and teeth
and bones. A most unpleasant woman. She has small pale flinty blue
eyes, and however gushing her words may be, those eyes of hers always
remain coldly speculative.

I went across to her, leaving Flora by the window. She gave me a
handful of assorted knuckles and rings to squeeze, and began talking
volubly.

Had I heard about Flora’s engagement? So suitable in every way. The
dear young things had fallen in love at first sight. Such a perfect
pair, he so dark and she so fair.

“I can’t tell you, my dear Dr. Sheppard, the relief to a mother’s
heart.”

Mrs. Ackroyd sighed—a tribute to her mother’s heart, whilst her eyes
remained shrewdly observant of me.

“I was wondering. You are such an old friend of dear Roger’s. We
know how much he trusts to your judgment. So difficult for me—in
my position, as poor Cecil’s widow. But there are so many tiresome
things—settlements, you know—all that. I fully believe that Roger
intends to make settlements upon dear Flora, but, as you know, he is
just a _leetle_ peculiar about money. Very usual, I’ve heard, amongst
men who are captains of industry. I wondered, you know, if you could
just _sound_ him on the subject? Flora is so fond of you. We feel you
are quite an old friend, although we have only really known you just
over two years.”

Mrs. Ackroyd’s eloquence was cut short as the drawing-room door opened
once more. I was pleased at the interruption. I hate interfering in
other people’s affairs, and I had not the least intention of tackling
Ackroyd on the subject of Flora’s settlements. In another moment I
should have been forced to tell Mrs. Ackroyd as much.

“You know Major Blunt, don’t you, doctor?”

“Yes, indeed,” I said.

A lot of people know Hector Blunt—at least by repute. He has shot more
wild animals in unlikely places than any man living, I suppose. When
you mention him, people say: “Blunt—you don’t mean the big game man, do
you?”

His friendship with Ackroyd has always puzzled me a little. The two men
are so totally dissimilar. Hector Blunt is perhaps five years Ackroyd’s
junior. They made friends early in life, and though their ways have
diverged, the friendship still holds. About once in two years Blunt
spends a fortnight at Fernly, and an immense animal’s head, with an
amazing number of horns which fixes you with a glazed stare as soon
as you come inside the front door, is a permanent reminder of the
friendship.

Blunt had entered the room now with his own peculiar, deliberate, yet
soft-footed tread. He is a man of medium height, sturdily and rather
stockily built. His face is almost mahogany-colored, and is peculiarly
expressionless. He has gray eyes that give the impression of always
watching something that is happening very far away. He talks little,
and what he does say is said jerkily, as though the words were forced
out of him unwillingly.

He said now: “How are you, Sheppard?” in his usual abrupt fashion, and
then stood squarely in front of the fireplace looking over our heads as
though he saw something very interesting happening in Timbuctoo.

“Major Blunt,” said Flora, “I wish you’d tell me about these African
things. I’m sure you know what they all are.”

I have heard Hector Blunt described as a woman hater, but I noticed
that he joined Flora at the silver table with what might be described
as alacrity. They bent over it together.

I was afraid Mrs. Ackroyd would begin talking about settlements again,
so I made a few hurried remarks about the new sweet pea. I knew there
was a new sweet pea because the _Daily Mail_ had told me so that
morning. Mrs. Ackroyd knows nothing about horticulture, but she is the
kind of woman who likes to appear well-informed about the topics of the
day, and she, too, reads the _Daily Mail_. We were able to converse
quite intelligently until Ackroyd and his secretary joined us, and
immediately afterwards Parker announced dinner.

My place at table was between Mrs. Ackroyd and Flora. Blunt was on Mrs.
Ackroyd’s other side, and Geoffrey Raymond next to him.

Dinner was not a cheerful affair. Ackroyd was visibly preoccupied. He
looked wretched, and ate next to nothing. Mrs. Ackroyd, Raymond, and
I kept the conversation going. Flora seemed affected by her uncle’s
depression, and Blunt relapsed into his usual taciturnity.

Immediately after dinner Ackroyd slipped his arm through mine and led
me off to his study.

“Once we’ve had coffee, we shan’t be disturbed again,” he explained. “I
told Raymond to see to it that we shouldn’t be interrupted.”

I studied him quietly without appearing to do so. He was clearly under
the influence of some strong excitement. For a minute or two he paced
up and down the room, then, as Parker entered with the coffee tray, he
sank into an arm-chair in front of the fire.

The study was a comfortable apartment. Book-shelves lined one wall of
it. The chairs were big and covered in dark blue leather. A large desk
stood by the window and was covered with papers neatly docketed and
filed. On a round table were various magazines and sporting papers.

“I’ve had a return of that pain after food lately,” remarked Ackroyd
casually, as he helped himself to coffee. “You must give me some more
of those tablets of yours.”

It struck me that he was anxious to convey the impression that our
conference was a medical one. I played up accordingly.

“I thought as much. I brought some up with me.”

“Good man. Hand them over now.”

“They’re in my bag in the hall. I’ll get them.”

Ackroyd arrested me.

“Don’t you trouble. Parker will get them. Bring in the doctor’s bag,
will you, Parker?”

“Very good, sir.”

Parker withdrew. As I was about to speak, Ackroyd threw up his hand.

“Not yet. Wait. Don’t you see I’m in such a state of nerves that I can
hardly contain myself?”

I saw that plainly enough. And I was very uneasy. All sorts of
forebodings assailed me.

Ackroyd spoke again almost immediately.

“Make certain that window’s closed, will you?” he asked.

Somewhat surprised, I got up and went to it. It was not a French
window, but one of the ordinary sash type. The heavy blue velvet
curtains were drawn in front of it, but the window itself was open at
the top.

Parker reëntered the room with my bag while I was still at the window.

“That’s all right,” I said, emerging again into the room.

“You’ve put the latch across?”

“Yes, yes. What’s the matter with you, Ackroyd?”

The door had just closed behind Parker, or I would not have put the
question.

Ackroyd waited just a minute before replying.

“I’m in hell,” he said slowly, after a minute. “No, don’t bother with
those damned tablets. I only said that for Parker. Servants are so
curious. Come here and sit down. The door’s closed too, isn’t it?”

“Yes. Nobody can overhear; don’t be uneasy.”

“Sheppard, nobody knows what I’ve gone through in the last twenty-four
hours. If a man’s house ever fell in ruins about him, mine has about
me. This business of Ralph’s is the last straw. But we won’t talk about
that now. It’s the other—the other——! I don’t know what to do about it.
And I’ve got to make up my mind soon.”

“What’s the trouble?”

Ackroyd remained silent for a minute or two. He seemed curiously averse
to begin. When he did speak, the question he asked came as a complete
surprise. It was the last thing I expected.

“Sheppard, you attended Ashley Ferrars in his last illness, didn’t you?”

“Yes, I did.”

He seemed to find even greater difficulty in framing his next question.

“Did you never suspect—did it ever enter your head—that—well, that he
might have been poisoned?”

I was silent for a minute or two. Then I made up my mind what to say.
Roger Ackroyd was not Caroline.

“I’ll tell you the truth,” I said. “At the time I had no suspicion
whatever, but since—well, it was mere idle talk on my sister’s part
that first put the idea into my head. Since then I haven’t been able to
get it out again. But, mind you, I’ve no foundation whatever for that
suspicion.”

“He _was_ poisoned,” said Ackroyd.

He spoke in a dull heavy voice.

“Who by?” I asked sharply.

“His wife.”

“How do you know that?”

“She told me so herself.”

“When?”

“Yesterday! My God! yesterday! It seems ten years ago.”

I waited a minute, and then he went on.

“You understand, Sheppard, I’m telling you this in confidence. It’s to
go no further. I want your advice—I can’t carry the whole weight by
myself. As I said just now, I don’t know what to do.”

“Can you tell me the whole story?” I said. “I’m still in the dark. How
did Mrs. Ferrars come to make this confession to you?”

“It’s like this. Three months ago I asked Mrs. Ferrars to marry me.
She refused. I asked her again and she consented, but she refused to
allow me to make the engagement public until her year of mourning was
up. Yesterday I called upon her, pointed out that a year and three
weeks had now elapsed since her husband’s death, and that there could
be no further objection to making the engagement public property. I
had noticed that she had been very strange in her manner for some days.
Now, suddenly, without the least warning, she broke down completely.
She—she told me everything. Her hatred of her brute of a husband, her
growing love for me, and the—the dreadful means she had taken. Poison!
My God! It was murder in cold blood.”

I saw the repulsion, the horror, in Ackroyd’s face. So Mrs. Ferrars
must have seen it. Ackroyd is not the type of the great lover who can
forgive all for love’s sake. He is fundamentally a good citizen. All
that was sound and wholesome and law-abiding in him must have turned
from her utterly in that moment of revelation.

“Yes,” he went on, in a low, monotonous voice, “she confessed
everything. It seems that there is one person who has known all
along—who has been blackmailing her for huge sums. It was the strain of
that that drove her nearly mad.”

“Who was the man?”

Suddenly before my eyes there arose the picture of Ralph Paton and Mrs.
Ferrars side by side. Their heads so close together. I felt a momentary
throb of anxiety. Supposing—oh! but surely that was impossible. I
remembered the frankness of Ralph’s greeting that very afternoon.
Absurd!

“She wouldn’t tell me his name,” said Ackroyd slowly. “As a matter of
fact, she didn’t actually say that it was a man. But of course——”

“Of course,” I agreed. “It must have been a man. And you’ve no
suspicion at all?”

For answer Ackroyd groaned and dropped his head into his hands.

“It can’t be,” he said. “I’m mad even to think of such a thing. No, I
won’t even admit to you the wild suspicion that crossed my mind. I’ll
tell you this much, though. Something she said made me think that the
person in question might be actually among my household—but that can’t
be so. I must have misunderstood her.”

“What did you say to her?” I asked.

“What could I say? She saw, of course, the awful shock it had been to
me. And then there was the question, what was my duty in the matter?
She had made me, you see, an accessory after the fact. She saw all
that, I think, quicker than I did. I was stunned, you know. She asked
me for twenty-four hours—made me promise to do nothing till the end
of that time. And she steadfastly refused to give me the name of the
scoundrel who had been blackmailing her. I suppose she was afraid that
I might go straight off and hammer him, and then the fat would have
been in the fire as far as she was concerned. She told me that I should
hear from her before twenty-four hours had passed. My God! I swear to
you, Sheppard, that it never entered my head what she meant to do.
Suicide! And I drove her to it.”

“No, no,” I said. “Don’t take an exaggerated view of things. The
responsibility for her death doesn’t lie at your door.”

“The question is, what am I to do now? The poor lady is dead. Why rake
up past trouble?”

“I rather agree with you,” I said.

“But there’s another point. How am I to get hold of that scoundrel who
drove her to death as surely as if he’d killed her. He knew of the
first crime, and he fastened on to it like some obscene vulture. She’s
paid the penalty. Is he to go scot-free?”

“I see,” I said slowly. “You want to hunt him down? It will mean a lot
of publicity, you know.”

“Yes, I’ve thought of that. I’ve zigzagged to and fro in my mind.”

“I agree with you that the villain ought to be punished, but the cost
has got to be reckoned.”

Ackroyd rose and walked up and down. Presently he sank into the chair
again.

“Look here, Sheppard, suppose we leave it like this. If no word comes
from her, we’ll let the dead things lie.”

“What do you mean by word coming from her?” I asked curiously.

“I have the strongest impression that somewhere or somehow she must
have left a message for me—before she went. I can’t argue about it, but
there it is.”

I shook my head.

“She left no letter or word of any kind. I asked.”

“Sheppard, I’m convinced that she did. And more, I’ve a feeling that by
deliberately choosing death, she wanted the whole thing to come out, if
only to be revenged on the man who drove her to desperation. I believe
that if I could have seen her then, she would have told me his name and
bid me go for him for all I was worth.”

He looked at me.

“You don’t believe in impressions?”

“Oh, yes, I do, in a sense. If, as you put it, word should come from
her——”

I broke off. The door opened noiselessly and Parker entered with a
salver on which were some letters.

“The evening post, sir,” he said, handing the salver to Ackroyd.

Then he collected the coffee cups and withdrew.

My attention, diverted for a moment, came back to Ackroyd. He was
staring like a man turned to stone at a long blue envelope. The other
letters he had let drop to the ground.

“_Her writing_,” he said in a whisper. “She must have gone out and
posted it last night, just before—before——”

He ripped open the envelope and drew out a thick enclosure. Then he
looked up sharply.

“You’re sure you shut the window?” he said.

“Quite sure,” I said, surprised. “Why?”

“All this evening I’ve had a queer feeling of being watched, spied
upon. What’s that——?”

He turned sharply. So did I. We both had the impression of hearing the
latch of the door give ever so slightly. I went across to it and opened
it. There was no one there.

“Nerves,” murmured Ackroyd to himself.

He unfolded the thick sheets of paper, and read aloud in a low voice.

  “_My dear, my very dear Roger,—A life calls for a life. I see
  that—I saw it in your face this afternoon. So I am taking the only
  road open to me. I leave to you the punishment of the person who
  has made my life a hell upon earth for the last year. I would not
  tell you the name this afternoon, but I propose to write it to you
  now. I have no children or near relations to be spared, so do not
  fear publicity. If you can, Roger, my very dear Roger, forgive me
  the wrong I meant to do you, since when the time came, I could not
  do it after all...._”

Ackroyd, his finger on the sheet to turn it over, paused.

“Sheppard, forgive me, but I must read this alone,” he said unsteadily.
“It was meant for my eyes, and my eyes only.”

He put the letter in the envelope and laid it on the table.

“Later, when I am alone.”

“No,” I cried impulsively, “read it now.”

Ackroyd stared at me in some surprise.

“I beg your pardon,” I said, reddening. “I do not mean read it aloud to
me. But read it through whilst I am still here.”

Ackroyd shook his head.

“No, I’d rather wait.”

But for some reason, obscure to myself, I continued to urge him.

“At least, read the name of the man,” I said.

Now Ackroyd is essentially pig-headed. The more you urge him to do a
thing, the more determined he is not to do it. All my arguments were in
vain.

The letter had been brought in at twenty minutes to nine. It was just
on ten minutes to nine when I left him, the letter still unread. I
hesitated with my hand on the door handle, looking back and wondering
if there was anything I had left undone. I could think of nothing. With
a shake of the head I passed out and closed the door behind me.

I was startled by seeing the figure of Parker close at hand. He looked
embarrassed, and it occurred to me that he might have been listening at
the door.

What a fat, smug, oily face the man had, and surely there was something
decidedly shifty in his eye.

“Mr. Ackroyd particularly does not want to be disturbed,” I said
coldly. “He told me to tell you so.”

“Quite so, sir. I—I fancied I heard the bell ring.”

This was such a palpable untruth that I did not trouble to reply.
Preceding me to the hall, Parker helped me on with my overcoat, and I
stepped out into the night. The moon was overcast and everything seemed
very dark and still. The village church clock chimed nine o’clock
as I passed through the lodge gates. I turned to the left towards
the village, and almost cannoned into a man coming in the opposite
direction.

“This the way to Fernly Park, mister?” asked the stranger in a hoarse
voice.

I looked at him. He was wearing a hat pulled down over his eyes, and
his coat collar turned up. I could see little or nothing of his face,
but he seemed a young fellow. The voice was rough and uneducated.

“These are the lodge gates here,” I said.

“Thank you, mister.” He paused, and then added, quite unnecessarily,
“I’m a stranger in these parts, you see.”

He went on, passing through the gates as I turned to look after him.

The odd thing was that his voice reminded me of some one’s voice that I
knew, but whose it was I could not think.

Ten minutes later I was at home once more. Caroline was full of
curiosity to know why I had returned so early. I had to make up a
slightly fictitious account of the evening in order to satisfy her, and
I had an uneasy feeling that she saw through the transparent device.

At ten o’clock I rose, yawned, and suggested bed. Caroline acquiesced.

It was Friday night, and on Friday night I wind the clocks. I did it as
usual, whilst Caroline satisfied herself that the servants had locked
up the kitchen properly.

It was a quarter past ten as we went up the stairs. I had just reached
the top when the telephone rang in the hall below.

“Mrs. Bates,” said Caroline immediately.

“I’m afraid so,” I said ruefully.

I ran down the stairs and took up the receiver.

“What?” I said. “_What?_ Certainly, I’ll come at once.”

I ran upstairs, caught up my bag, and stuffed a few extra dressings
into it.

“Parker telephoning,” I shouted to Caroline, “from Fernly. They’ve just
found Roger Ackroyd murdered.”




                               CHAPTER V

                                MURDER


I got out the car in next to no time, and drove rapidly to Fernly.
Jumping out, I pulled the bell impatiently. There was some delay in
answering, and I rang again.

Then I heard the rattle of the chain and Parker, his impassivity of
countenance quite unmoved, stood in the open doorway.

I pushed past him into the hall.

“Where is he?” I demanded sharply.

“I beg your pardon, sir?”

“Your master. Mr. Ackroyd. Don’t stand there staring at me, man. Have
you notified the police?”

“The police, sir? Did you say the police?” Parker stared at me as
though I were a ghost.

“What’s the matter with you, Parker? If, as you say, your master has
been murdered——”

A gasp broke from Parker.

“The master? Murdered? Impossible, sir!”

It was my turn to stare.

“Didn’t you telephone to me, not five minutes ago, and tell me that Mr.
Ackroyd had been found murdered?”

“Me, sir? Oh! no indeed, sir. I wouldn’t dream of doing such a thing.”

“Do you mean to say it’s all a hoax? That there’s nothing the matter
with Mr. Ackroyd?”

“Excuse me, sir, did the person telephoning use my name?”

“I’ll give you the exact words I heard. ‘_Is that Dr. Sheppard? Parker,
the butler at Fernly, speaking. Will you please come at once, sir. Mr.
Ackroyd has been murdered._’”

Parker and I stared at each other blankly.

“A very wicked joke to play, sir,” he said at last, in a shocked tone.
“Fancy saying a thing like that.”

“Where is Mr. Ackroyd?” I asked suddenly.

“Still in the study, I fancy, sir. The ladies have gone to bed, and
Major Blunt and Mr. Raymond are in the billiard room.”

“I think I’ll just look in and see him for a minute,” I said. “I know
he didn’t want to be disturbed again, but this odd practical joke has
made me uneasy. I’d just like to satisfy myself that he’s all right.”

“Quite so, sir. It makes me feel quite uneasy myself. If you don’t
object to my accompanying you as far as the door, sir——?”

“Not at all,” I said. “Come along.”

I passed through the door on the right, Parker on my heels, traversed
the little lobby where a small flight of stairs led upstairs to
Ackroyd’s bedroom, and tapped on the study door.

There was no answer. I turned the handle, but the door was locked.

“Allow me, sir,” said Parker.

Very nimbly, for a man of his build, he dropped on one knee and applied
his eye to the keyhole.

“Key is in the lock all right, sir,” he said, rising. “On the inside.
Mr. Ackroyd must have locked himself in and possibly just dropped off
to sleep.”

I bent down and verified Parker’s statement.

“It seems all right,” I said, “but, all the same, Parker, I’m going
to wake your master up. I shouldn’t be satisfied to go home without
hearing from his own lips that he’s quite all right.”

So saying, I rattled the handle and called out, “Ackroyd, Ackroyd, just
a minute.”

But still there was no answer. I glanced over my shoulder.

“I don’t want to alarm the household,” I said hesitatingly.

Parker went across and shut the door from the big hall through which we
had come.

“I think that will be all right now, sir. The billiard room is at
the other side of the house, and so are the kitchen quarters and the
ladies’ bedrooms.”

I nodded comprehendingly. Then I banged once more frantically on the
door, and stooping down, fairly bawled through the keyhole:—

“Ackroyd, Ackroyd! It’s Sheppard. Let me in.”

And still—silence. Not a sign of life from within the locked room.
Parker and I glanced at each other.

“Look here, Parker,” I said, “I’m going to break this door in—or
rather, we are. I’ll take the responsibility.”

“If you say so, sir,” said Parker, rather doubtfully.

“I do say so. I’m seriously alarmed about Mr. Ackroyd.”

I looked round the small lobby and picked up a heavy oak chair. Parker
and I held it between us and advanced to the assault. Once, twice, and
three times we hurled it against the lock. At the third blow it gave,
and we staggered into the room.

Ackroyd was sitting as I had left him in the arm-chair before the fire.
His head had fallen sideways, and clearly visible, just below the
collar of his coat, was a shining piece of twisted metalwork.

Parker and I advanced till we stood over the recumbent figure. I heard
the butler draw in his breath with a sharp hiss.

“Stabbed from be’ind,” he murmured. “’Orrible!”

He wiped his moist brow with his handkerchief, then stretched out a
hand gingerly towards the hilt of the dagger.

“You mustn’t touch that,” I said sharply. “Go at once to the telephone
and ring up the police station. Inform them of what has happened. Then
tell Mr. Raymond and Major Blunt.”

“Very good, sir.”

Parker hurried away, still wiping his perspiring brow.

I did what little had to be done. I was careful not to disturb the
position of the body, and not to handle the dagger at all. No object
was to be attained by moving it. Ackroyd had clearly been dead some
little time.

Then I heard young Raymond’s voice, horror-stricken and incredulous,
outside.

“What do you say? Oh! impossible! Where’s the doctor?”

He appeared impetuously in the doorway, then stopped dead, his face
very white. A hand put him aside, and Hector Blunt came past him into
the room.

“My God!” said Raymond from behind him; “it’s true, then.”

Blunt came straight on till he reached the chair. He bent over the
body, and I thought that, like Parker, he was going to lay hold of the
dagger hilt. I drew him back with one hand.

“Nothing must be moved,” I explained. “The police must see him exactly
as he is now.”

Blunt nodded in instant comprehension. His face was expressionless as
ever, but I thought I detected signs of emotion beneath the stolid
mask. Geoffrey Raymond had joined us now, and stood peering over
Blunt’s shoulder at the body.

“This is terrible,” he said in a low voice.

He had regained his composure, but as he took off the pince-nez he
habitually wore and polished them I observed that his hand was shaking.

“Robbery, I suppose,” he said. “How did the fellow get in? Through the
window? Has anything been taken?”

He went towards the desk.

“You think it’s burglary?” I said slowly.

“What else could it be? There’s no question of suicide, I suppose?”

“No man could stab himself in such a way,” I said confidently. “It’s
murder right enough. But with what motive?”

“Roger hadn’t an enemy in the world,” said Blunt quietly. “Must have
been burglars. But what was the thief after? Nothing seems to be
disarranged?”

He looked round the room. Raymond was still sorting the papers on the
desk.

“There seems nothing missing, and none of the drawers show signs of
having been tampered with,” the secretary observed at last. “It’s very
mysterious.”

Blunt made a slight motion with his head.

“There are some letters on the floor here,” he said.

I looked down. Three or four letters still lay where Ackroyd had
dropped them earlier in the evening.

But the blue envelope containing Mrs. Ferrars’s letter had disappeared.
I half opened my mouth to speak, but at that moment the sound of a bell
pealed through the house. There was a confused murmur of voices in the
hall, and then Parker appeared with our local inspector and a police
constable.

“Good evening, gentlemen,” said the inspector. “I’m terribly sorry for
this! A good kind gentleman like Mr. Ackroyd. The butler says it is
murder. No possibility of accident or suicide, doctor?”

“None whatever,” I said.

“Ah! A bad business.”

He came and stood over the body.

“Been moved at all?” he asked sharply.

“Beyond making certain that life was extinct—an easy matter—I have not
disturbed the body in any way.”

“Ah! And everything points to the murderer having got clear away—for
the moment, that is. Now then, let me hear all about it. Who found the
body?”

I explained the circumstances carefully.

“A telephone message, you say? From the butler?”

“A message that I never sent,” declared Parker earnestly. “I’ve not
been near the telephone the whole evening. The others can bear me out
that I haven’t.”

“Very odd, that. Did it sound like Parker’s voice, doctor?”

“Well—I can’t say I noticed. I took it for granted, you see.”

“Naturally. Well, you got up here, broke in the door, and found poor
Mr. Ackroyd like this. How long should you say he had been dead,
doctor?”

“Half an hour at least—perhaps longer,” I said.

“The door was locked on the inside, you say? What about the window?”

“I myself closed and bolted it earlier in the evening at Mr. Ackroyd’s
request.”

The inspector strode across to it and threw back the curtains.

“Well, it’s open now anyway,” he remarked.

True enough, the window was open, the lower sash being raised to its
fullest extent.

The inspector produced a pocket torch and flashed it along the sill
outside.

“This is the way he went all right,” he remarked, “_and_ got in. See
here.”

In the light of the powerful torch, several clearly defined footmarks
could be seen. They seemed to be those of shoes with rubber studs
in the soles. One particularly clear one pointed inwards, another,
slightly overlapping it, pointed outwards.

“Plain as a pikestaff,” said the inspector. “Any valuables missing?”

Geoffrey Raymond shook his head.

“Not so that we can discover. Mr. Ackroyd never kept anything of
particular value in this room.”

“H’m,” said the inspector. “Man found an open window. Climbed in, saw
Mr. Ackroyd sitting there—maybe he’d fallen asleep. Man stabbed him
from behind, then lost his nerve and made off. But he’s left his tracks
pretty clearly. We ought to get hold of _him_ without much difficulty.
No suspicious strangers been hanging about anywhere?”

“Oh!” I said suddenly.

“What is it, doctor?”

“I met a man this evening—just as I was turning out of the gate. He
asked me the way to Fernly Park.”

“What time would that be?”

“Just nine o’clock. I heard it chime the hour as I was turning out of
the gate.”

“Can you describe him?”

I did so to the best of my ability.

The inspector turned to the butler.

“Any one answering that description come to the front door?”

“No, sir. No one has been to the house at all this evening.”

“What about the back?”

“I don’t think so, sir, but I’ll make inquiries.”

He moved towards the door, but the inspector held up a large hand.

“No, thanks. I’ll do my own inquiring. But first of all I want to fix
the time a little more clearly. When was Mr. Ackroyd last seen alive?”

“Probably by me,” I said, “when I left at—let me see—about ten minutes
to nine. He told me that he didn’t wish to be disturbed, and I repeated
the order to Parker.”

“Just so, sir,” said Parker respectfully.

“Mr. Ackroyd was certainly alive at half-past nine,” put in Raymond,
“for I heard his voice in here talking.”

“Who was he talking to?”

“That I don’t know. Of course, at the time I took it for granted that
it was Dr. Sheppard who was with him. I wanted to ask him a question
about some papers I was engaged upon, but when I heard the voices I
remembered that he had said he wanted to talk to Dr. Sheppard without
being disturbed, and I went away again. But now it seems that the
doctor had already left?”

I nodded.

“I was at home by a quarter-past nine,” I said. “I didn’t go out again
until I received the telephone call.”

“Who could have been with him at half-past nine?” queried the
inspector. “It wasn’t you, Mr.—er——”

“Major Blunt,” I said.

“Major Hector Blunt?” asked the inspector, a respectful tone creeping
into his voice.

Blunt merely jerked his head affirmatively.

“I think we’ve seen you down here before, sir,” said the inspector.
“I didn’t recognize you for the moment, but you were staying with Mr.
Ackroyd a year ago last May.”

“June,” corrected Blunt.

“Just so, June it was. Now, as I was saying, it wasn’t you with Mr.
Ackroyd at nine-thirty this evening?”

Blunt shook his head.

“Never saw him after dinner,” he volunteered.

The inspector turned once more to Raymond.

“You didn’t overhear any of the conversation going on, did you, sir?”

“I did catch just a fragment of it,” said the secretary, “and,
supposing as I did that it was Dr. Sheppard who was with Mr. Ackroyd,
that fragment struck me as distinctly odd. As far as I can remember,
the exact words were these. Mr. Ackroyd was speaking. ‘The calls
on my purse have been so frequent of late’—that is what he was
saying—‘of late, that I fear it is impossible for me to accede to your
request....’ I went away again at once, of course, so did not hear any
more. But I rather wondered because Dr. Sheppard——”

“——Does not ask for loans for himself or subscriptions for others,” I
finished.

“A demand for money,” said the inspector musingly. “It may be that here
we have a very important clew.” He turned to the butler. “You say,
Parker, that nobody was admitted by the front door this evening?”

“That’s what I say, sir.”

“Then it seems almost certain that Mr. Ackroyd himself must have
admitted this stranger. But I don’t quite see——”

The inspector went into a kind of day-dream for some minutes.

“One thing’s clear,” he said at length, rousing himself from his
absorption. “Mr. Ackroyd was alive and well at nine-thirty. That is the
last moment at which he is known to have been alive.”

Parker gave vent to an apologetic cough which brought the inspector’s
eyes on him at once.

“Well?” he said sharply.

“If you’ll excuse me, sir, Miss Flora saw him after that.”

“Miss Flora?”

“Yes, sir. About a quarter to ten that would be. It was after that that
she told me Mr. Ackroyd wasn’t to be disturbed again to-night.”

“Did he send her to you with that message?”

“Not exactly, sir. I was bringing a tray with soda and whisky when Miss
Flora, who was just coming out of this room, stopped me and said her
uncle didn’t want to be disturbed.”

The inspector looked at the butler with rather closer attention than he
had bestowed on him up to now.

“You’d already been told that Mr. Ackroyd didn’t want to be disturbed,
hadn’t you?”

Parker began to stammer. His hands shook.

“Yes, sir. Yes, sir. Quite so, sir.”

“And yet you were proposing to do so?”

“I’d forgotten, sir. At least I mean, I always bring the whisky and
soda about that time, sir, and ask if there’s anything more, and I
thought—well, I was doing as usual without thinking.”

It was at this moment that it began to dawn upon me that Parker was
most suspiciously flustered. The man was shaking and twitching all over.

“H’m,” said the inspector. “I must see Miss Ackroyd at once. For the
moment we’ll leave this room exactly as it is. I can return here after
I’ve heard what Miss Ackroyd has to tell me. I shall just take the
precaution of shutting and bolting the window.”

This precaution accomplished, he led the way into the hall and we
followed him. He paused a moment, as he glanced up at the little
staircase, then spoke over his shoulder to the constable.

“Jones, you’d better stay here. Don’t let any one go into that room.”

Parker interposed deferentially.

“If you’ll excuse me, sir. If you were to lock the door into the main
hall, nobody could gain access to this part. That staircase leads only
to Mr. Ackroyd’s bedroom and bathroom. There is no communication with
the other part of the house. There once was a door through, but Mr.
Ackroyd had it blocked up. He liked to feel that his suite was entirely
private.”

To make things clear and explain the position, I have appended a rough
sketch of the right-hand wing of the house. The small staircase leads,
as Parker explained, to a big bedroom (made by two being knocked into
one) and an adjoining bathroom and lavatory.

[Illustration:

  +------------------------------------.
  |             TERRACE                 .
  |--==--+--==---==--+---==---==----+    .
  |PANTRY|   DINING  |    DRAWING   |    .
  |      |    ROOM   |     ROOM     |    .
  |      |           |              |    .
  |___/ _+___/ __/  _+_/ +__________+    .
  |                      |          |    .
  |___  ___+____+         \STAIRS‖‖‖|    .
  |   \    |====|        +-- /------+    .
  |        |====|        |          |    .
  |BILLIARD|====|  HALL  |          |    .
  |  ROOM  |====|        |  STUDY   ‖    .
  |        +----+        |          ‖    .
  |        |STAIRCASE    |          |    .
  |        |             |          |    .
  |       \              |          |    .
  +-==-==--+-------+  +--+----------+-  -+
                   |  |              .  .
                FRONT DOOR          .  .
                 .      .          .  .
                 .      .         .  .
                  .    .         .  .
                   .  .     PATH  .
                   .  .      .  .    ..
           LAWN    .  .     .  .   .    .
                   .  .   .  .     .    .
                   .  . .  .         ..
                   .  . . .       SUMMER
                   .  +---+       HOUSE
                   .  |   |LODGE
  -----------------+  +---+--------------
]

The inspector took in the position at a glance. We went through into
the large hall and he locked the door behind him, slipping the key into
his pocket. Then he gave the constable some low-voiced instructions,
and the latter prepared to depart.

“We must get busy on those shoe tracks,” explained the inspector. “But
first of all, I must have a word with Miss Ackroyd. She was the last
person to see her uncle alive. Does she know yet?”

Raymond shook his head.

“Well, no need to tell her for another five minutes. She can answer my
questions better without being upset by knowing the truth about her
uncle. Tell her there’s been a burglary, and ask her if she would mind
dressing and coming down to answer a few questions.”

It was Raymond who went upstairs on this errand.

“Miss Ackroyd will be down in a minute,” he said, when he returned. “I
told her just what you suggested.”

In less than five minutes Flora descended the staircase. She was
wrapped in a pale pink silk kimono. She looked anxious and excited.

The inspector stepped forward.

“Good-evening, Miss Ackroyd,” he said civilly. “We’re afraid there’s
been an attempt at robbery, and we want you to help us. What’s this
room—the billiard room? Come in here and sit down.”

Flora sat down composedly on the wide divan which ran the length of the
wall, and looked up at the inspector.

“I don’t quite understand. What has been stolen? What do you want me to
tell you?”

“It’s just this, Miss Ackroyd. Parker here says you came out of your
uncle’s study at about a quarter to ten. Is that right?”

“Quite right. I had been to say good-night to him.”

“And the time is correct?”

“Well, it must have been about then. I can’t say exactly. It might have
been later.”

“Was your uncle alone, or was there any one with him?”

“He was alone. Dr. Sheppard had gone.”

“Did you happen to notice whether the window was open or shut?”

Flora shook her head.

“I can’t say. The curtains were drawn.”

“Exactly. And your uncle seemed quite as usual?”

“I think so.”

“Do you mind telling us exactly what passed between you?”

Flora paused a minute, as though to collect her recollections.

“I went in and said, ‘Good-night, uncle, I’m going to bed now. I’m
tired to-night.’ He gave a sort of grunt, and—I went over and kissed
him, and he said something about my looking nice in the frock I had on,
and then he told me to run away as he was busy. So I went.”

“Did he ask specially not to be disturbed?”

“Oh! yes, I forgot. He said: ‘Tell Parker I don’t want anything more
to-night, and that he’s not to disturb me.’ I met Parker just outside
the door and gave him uncle’s message.”

“Just so,” said the inspector.

“Won’t you tell me what it is that has been stolen?”

“We’re not quite—certain,” said the inspector hesitatingly.

A wide look of alarm came into the girl’s eyes. She started up.

“What is it? You’re hiding something from me?”

Moving in his usual unobtrusive manner, Hector Blunt came between her
and the inspector. She half stretched out her hand, and he took it in
both of his, patting it as though she were a very small child, and she
turned to him as though something in his stolid, rocklike demeanor
promised comfort and safety.

“It’s bad news, Flora,” he said quietly. “Bad news for all of us. Your
Uncle Roger——”

“Yes?”

“It will be a shock to you. Bound to be. Poor Roger’s dead.”

Flora drew away from him, her eyes dilating with horror.

“When?” she whispered. “When?”

“Very soon after you left him, I’m afraid,” said Blunt gravely.

Flora raised her hand to her throat, gave a little cry, and I hurried
to catch her as she fell. She had fainted, and Blunt and I carried her
upstairs and laid her on her bed. Then I got him to wake Mrs. Ackroyd
and tell her the news. Flora soon revived, and I brought her mother to
her, telling her what to do for the girl. Then I hurried downstairs
again.




                              CHAPTER VI

                          THE TUNISIAN DAGGER


I met the inspector just coming from the door which led into the
kitchen quarters.

“How’s the young lady, doctor?”

“Coming round nicely. Her mother’s with her.”

“That’s good. I’ve been questioning the servants. They all declare that
no one has been to the back door to-night. Your description of that
stranger was rather vague. Can’t you give us something more definite to
go upon?”

“I’m afraid not,” I said regretfully. “It was a dark night, you see,
and the fellow had his coat collar well pulled up and his hat squashed
down over his eyes.”

“H’m,” said the inspector. “Looked as though he wanted to conceal his
face. Sure it was no one you know?”

I replied in the negative, but not as decidedly as I might have done. I
remembered my impression that the stranger’s voice was not unfamiliar
to me. I explained this rather haltingly to the inspector.

“It was a rough, uneducated voice, you say?”

I agreed, but it occurred to me that the roughness had been of an
almost exaggerated quality. If, as the inspector thought, the man had
wished to hide his face, he might equally well have tried to disguise
his voice.

“Do you mind coming into the study with me again, doctor? There are one
or two things I want to ask you.”

I acquiesced. Inspector Davis unlocked the door of the lobby, we passed
through, and he locked the door again behind him.

“We don’t want to be disturbed,” he said grimly. “And we don’t want any
eavesdropping either. What’s all this about blackmail?”

“Blackmail!” I exclaimed, very much startled.

“Is it an effort of Parker’s imagination? Or is there something in it?”

“If Parker heard anything about blackmail,” I said slowly, “he must
have been listening outside this door with his ear glued against the
keyhole.”

Davis nodded.

“Nothing more likely. You see, I’ve been instituting a few inquiries as
to what Parker has been doing with himself this evening. To tell the
truth, I didn’t like his manner. The man knows something. When I began
to question him, he got the wind up, and plumped out some garbled story
of blackmail.”

I took an instant decision.

“I’m rather glad you’ve brought the matter up,” I said. “I’ve been
trying to decide whether to make a clean breast of things or not. I’d
already practically decided to tell you everything, but I was going to
wait for a favorable opportunity. You might as well have it now.”

And then and there I narrated the whole events of the evening as I
have set them down here. The inspector listened keenly, occasionally
interjecting a question.

“Most extraordinary story I ever heard,” he said, when I had finished.
“And you say that letter has completely disappeared? It looks bad—it
looks very bad indeed. It gives us what we’ve been looking for—a motive
for the murder.”

I nodded.

“I realize that.”

“You say that Mr. Ackroyd hinted at a suspicion he had that some member
of his household was involved? Household’s rather an elastic term.”

“You don’t think that Parker himself might be the man we’re after?” I
suggested.

“It looks very like it. He was obviously listening at the door when
you came out. Then Miss Ackroyd came across him later bent on entering
the study. Say he tried again when she was safely out of the way. He
stabbed Ackroyd, locked the door on the inside, opened the window, and
got out that way, and went round to a side door which he had previously
left open. How’s that?”

“There’s only one thing against it,” I said slowly. “If Ackroyd went on
reading that letter as soon as I left, as he intended to do, I don’t
see him continuing to sit on here and turn things over in his mind for
another hour. He’d have had Parker in at once, accused him then and
there, and there would have been a fine old uproar. Remember, Ackroyd
was a man of choleric temper.”

“Mightn’t have had time to go on with the letter just then,” suggested
the inspector. “We know some one was with him at half-past nine. If
that visitor turned up as soon as you left, and after he went, Miss
Ackroyd came in to say good-night—well, he wouldn’t be able to go on
with the letter until close upon ten o’clock.”

“And the telephone call?”

“Parker sent that all right—perhaps before he thought of the locked
door and open window. Then he changed his mind—or got in a panic—and
decided to deny all knowledge of it. That was it, depend upon it.”

“Ye-es,” I said rather doubtfully.

“Anyway, we can find out the truth about the telephone call from the
exchange. If it was put through from here, I don’t see how any one
else but Parker could have sent it. Depend upon it, he’s our man.
But keep it dark—we don’t want to alarm him just yet, till we’ve got
all the evidence. I’ll see to it he doesn’t give us the slip. To all
appearances we’ll be concentrating on your mysterious stranger.”

He rose from where he had been sitting astride the chair belonging to
the desk, and crossed over to the still form in the arm-chair.

“The weapon ought to give us a clew,” he remarked, looking up. “It’s
something quite unique—a curio, I should think, by the look of it.”

He bent down, surveying the handle attentively, and I heard him give a
grunt of satisfaction. Then, very gingerly, he pressed his hands down
below the hilt and drew the blade out from the wound. Still carrying it
so as not to touch the handle, he placed it in a wide china mug which
adorned the mantelpiece.

“Yes,” he said, nodding at it. “Quite a work of art. There can’t be
many of them about.”

It was indeed a beautiful object. A narrow, tapering blade, and a hilt
of elaborately intertwined metals of curious and careful workmanship.
He touched the blade gingerly with his finger, testing its sharpness,
and made an appreciative grimace.

“Lord, what an edge,” he exclaimed. “A child could drive that into a
man—as easy as cutting butter. A dangerous sort of toy to have about.”

“May I examine the body properly now?” I asked.

He nodded.

“Go ahead.”

I made a thorough examination.

“Well?” said the inspector, when I had finished.

“I’ll spare you the technical language,” I said. “We’ll keep that
for the inquest. The blow was delivered by a right-handed man
standing behind him, and death must have been instantaneous. By the
expression on the dead man’s face, I should say that the blow was quite
unexpected. He probably died without knowing who his assailant was.”

“Butlers can creep about as soft-footed as cats,” said Inspector Davis.
“There’s not going to be much mystery about this crime. Take a look at
the hilt of that dagger.”

I took the look.

“I dare say they’re not apparent to you, but I can see them clearly
enough.” He lowered his voice. “_Fingerprints!_”

He stood off a few steps to judge of his effect.

“Yes,” I said mildly. “I guessed that.”

I do not see why I should be supposed to be totally devoid of
intelligence. After all, I read detective stories, and the newspapers,
and am a man of quite average ability. If there had been toe marks on
the dagger handle, now, that would have been quite a different thing. I
would then have registered any amount of surprise and awe.

I think the inspector was annoyed with me for declining to get
thrilled. He picked up the china mug and invited me to accompany him to
the billiard room.

“I want to see if Mr. Raymond can tell us anything about this dagger,”
he explained.

Locking the outer door behind us again, we made our way to the billiard
room, where we found Geoffrey Raymond. The inspector held up his
exhibit.

“Ever seen this before, Mr. Raymond?”

“Why—I believe—I’m almost sure that is a curio given to Mr. Ackroyd
by Major Blunt. It comes from Morocco—no, Tunis. So the crime was
committed with that? What an extraordinary thing. It seems almost
impossible, and yet there could hardly be two daggers the same. May I
fetch Major Blunt?”

Without waiting for an answer, he hurried off.

“Nice young fellow that,” said the inspector. “Something honest and
ingenuous about him.”

I agreed. In the two years that Geoffrey Raymond has been secretary to
Ackroyd, I have never seen him ruffled or out of temper. And he has
been, I know, a most efficient secretary.

In a minute or two Raymond returned, accompanied by Blunt.

“I was right,” said Raymond excitedly. “It _is_ the Tunisian dagger.”

“Major Blunt hasn’t looked at it yet,” objected the inspector.

“Saw it the moment I came into the study,” said the quiet man.

“You recognized it then?”

Blunt nodded.

“You said nothing about it,” said the inspector suspiciously.

“Wrong moment,” said Blunt. “Lot of harm done by blurting out things at
the wrong time.”

He returned the inspector’s stare placidly enough.

The latter grunted at last and turned away. He brought the dagger over
to Blunt.

“You’re quite sure about it, sir. You identify it positively?”

“Absolutely. No doubt whatever.”

“Where was this—er—curio usually kept? Can you tell me that, sir?”

It was the secretary who answered.

“In the silver table in the drawing-room.”

“What?” I exclaimed.

The others looked at me.

“Yes, doctor?” said the inspector encouragingly.

“It’s nothing.”

“Yes, doctor?” said the inspector again, still more encouragingly.

“It’s so trivial,” I explained apologetically. “Only that when I
arrived last night for dinner I heard the lid of the silver table being
shut down in the drawing-room.”

I saw profound skepticism and a trace of suspicion on the inspector’s
countenance.

“How did you know it was the silver table lid?”

I was forced to explain in detail—a long, tedious explanation which I
would infinitely rather not have had to make.

The inspector heard me to the end.

“Was the dagger in its place when you were looking over the contents?”
he asked.

“I don’t know,” I said. “I can’t say I remember noticing it—but, of
course, it may have been there all the time.”

“We’d better get hold of the housekeeper,” remarked the inspector, and
pulled the bell.

A few minutes later Miss Russell, summoned by Parker, entered the room.

“I don’t think I went near the silver table,” she said, when the
inspector had posed his question. “I was looking to see that all the
flowers were fresh. Oh! yes, I remember now. The silver table was
open—which it had no business to be, and I shut the lid down as I
passed.”

She looked at him aggressively.

“I see,” said the inspector. “Can you tell me if this dagger was in its
place then?”

Miss Russell looked at the weapon composedly.

“I can’t say, I’m sure,” she replied. “I didn’t stop to look. I knew
the family would be down any minute, and I wanted to get away.”

“Thank you,” said the inspector.

There was just a trace of hesitation in his manner, as though he would
have liked to question her further, but Miss Russell clearly accepted
the words as a dismissal, and glided from the room.

“Rather a Tartar, I should fancy, eh?” said the inspector, looking
after her. “Let me see. This silver table is in front of one of the
windows, I think you said, doctor?”

Raymond answered for me.

“Yes, the left-hand window.”

“And the window was open?”

“They were both ajar.”

“Well, I don’t think we need go into the question much further.
Somebody—I’ll just say somebody—could get that dagger any time he
liked, and exactly when he got it doesn’t matter in the least. I’ll be
coming up in the morning with the chief constable, Mr. Raymond. Until
then, I’ll keep the key of that door. I want Colonel Melrose to see
everything exactly as it is. I happen to know that he’s dining out the
other side of the county, and, I believe, staying the night....”

We watched the inspector take up the jar.

“I shall have to pack this carefully,” he observed. “It’s going to be
an important piece of evidence in more ways than one.”

A few minutes later as I came out of the billiard room with Raymond,
the latter gave a low chuckle of amusement.

I felt the pressure of his hand on my arm, and followed the direction
of his eyes. Inspector Davis seemed to be inviting Parker’s opinion of
a small pocket diary.

“A little obvious,” murmured my companion. “So Parker is the suspect,
is he? Shall we oblige Inspector Davis with a set of our fingerprints
also?”

He took two cards from the card tray, wiped them with his silk
handkerchief, then handed one to me and took the other himself. Then,
with a grin, he handed them to the police inspector.

“Souvenirs,” he said. “No. 1, Dr. Sheppard; No. 2, my humble self. One
from Major Blunt will be forthcoming in the morning.”

Youth is very buoyant. Even the brutal murder of his friend and
employer could not dim Geoffrey Raymond’s spirits for long. Perhaps
that is as it should be. I do not know. I have lost the quality of
resilience long since myself.

It was very late when I got back, and I hoped that Caroline would have
gone to bed. I might have known better.

She had hot cocoa waiting for me, and whilst I drank it, she extracted
the whole history of the evening from me. I said nothing of the
blackmailing business, but contented myself with giving her the facts
of the murder.

“The police suspect Parker,” I said, as I rose to my feet and prepared
to ascend to bed. “There seems a fairly clear case against him.”

“Parker!” said my sister. “Fiddlesticks! That inspector must be a
perfect fool. Parker indeed! Don’t tell me.”

With which obscure pronouncement we went up to bed.




                              CHAPTER VII

                   I LEARN MY NEIGHBOR’S PROFESSION


On the following morning I hurried unforgivably over my round. My
excuse can be that I had no very serious cases to attend. On my return
Caroline came into the hall to greet me.

“Flora Ackroyd is here,” she announced in an excited whisper.

“What?”

I concealed my surprise as best I could.

“She’s very anxious to see you. She’s been here half an hour.”

Caroline led the way into our small sitting-room, and I followed.

Flora was sitting on the sofa by the window. She was in black and she
sat nervously twisting her hands together. I was shocked by the sight
of her face. All the color had faded away from it. But when she spoke
her manner was as composed and resolute as possible.

“Dr. Sheppard, I have come to ask you to help me.”

“Of course he’ll help you, my dear,” said Caroline.

I don’t think Flora really wished Caroline to be present at the
interview. She would, I am sure, have infinitely preferred to speak to
me privately. But she also wanted to waste no time, so she made the
best of it.

“I want you to come to The Larches with me.”

“The Larches?” I queried, surprised.

“To see that funny little man?” exclaimed Caroline.

“Yes. You know who he is, don’t you?”

“We fancied,” I said, “that he might be a retired hairdresser.”

Flora’s blue eyes opened very wide.

“Why, he’s Hercule Poirot! You know who I mean—the private detective.
They say he’s done the most wonderful things—just like detectives do in
books. A year ago he retired and came to live down here. Uncle knew who
he was, but he promised not to tell any one, because M. Poirot wanted
to live quietly without being bothered by people.”

“So that’s who he is,” I said slowly.

“You’ve heard of him, of course?”

“I’m rather an old fogey, as Caroline tells me,” I said, “but I _have_
just heard of him.”

“Extraordinary!” commented Caroline.

I don’t know what she was referring to—possibly her own failure to
discover the truth.

“You want to go and see him?” I asked slowly. “Now why?”

“To get him to investigate this murder, of course,” said Caroline
sharply. “Don’t be so stupid, James.”

I was not really being stupid. Caroline does not always understand what
I am driving at.

“You haven’t got confidence in Inspector Davis?” I went on.

“Of course she hasn’t,” said Caroline. “I haven’t either.”

Any one would have thought it was Caroline’s uncle who had been
murdered.

“And how do you know he would take up the case?” I asked. “Remember he
has retired from active work.”

“That’s just it,” said Flora simply. “I’ve got to persuade him.”

“You are sure you are doing wisely?” I asked gravely.

“Of course she is,” said Caroline. “I’ll go with her myself if she
likes.”

“I’d rather the doctor came with me if you don’t mind, Miss Sheppard,”
said Flora.

She knows the value of being direct on certain occasions. Any hints
would certainly have been wasted on Caroline.

“You see,” she explained, following directness with tact, “Dr. Sheppard
being the doctor, and having found the body, he would be able to give
all the details to M. Poirot.”

“Yes,” said Caroline grudgingly, “I see that.”

I took a turn or two up and down the room.

“Flora,” I said gravely, “be guided by me. I advise you not to drag
this detective into the case.”

Flora sprang to her feet. The color rushed into her cheeks.

“I know why you say that,” she cried. “But it’s exactly for that reason
I’m so anxious to go. You’re afraid! But I’m not. I know Ralph better
than you do.”

“Ralph,” said Caroline. “What has Ralph got to do with it?”

Neither of us heeded her.

“Ralph may be weak,” continued Flora. “He may have done foolish things
in the past—wicked things even—but he wouldn’t murder any one.”

“No, no,” I exclaimed. “I never thought it of him.”

“Then why did you go to the Three Boars last night?” demanded Flora,
“on your way home—after uncle’s body was found?”

I was momentarily silenced. I had hoped that that visit of mine would
remain unnoticed.

“How did you know about that?” I countered.

“I went there this morning,” said Flora. “I heard from the servants
that Ralph was staying there——”

I interrupted her.

“You had no idea that he was in King’s Abbot?”

“No. I was astounded. I couldn’t understand it. I went there and asked
for him. They told me, what I suppose they told you last night, that
he went out at about nine o’clock yesterday evening—and—and never came
back.”

Her eyes met mine defiantly, and as though answering something in my
look, she burst out:—

“Well, why shouldn’t he? He might have gone—anywhere. He may even have
gone back to London.”

“Leaving his luggage behind?” I asked gently.

Flora stamped her foot.

“I don’t care. There must be a simple explanation.”

“And that’s why you want to go to Hercule Poirot? Isn’t it better to
leave things as they are? The police don’t suspect Ralph in the least,
remember. They’re working on quite another tack.”

“But that’s just _it_,” cried the girl. “They _do_ suspect him. A man
from Cranchester turned up this morning—Inspector Raglan, a horrid,
weaselly little man. I found he had been to the Three Boars this
morning before me. They told me all about his having been there, and
the questions he had asked. He must think Ralph did it.”

“That’s a change of mind from last night, if so,” I said slowly. “He
doesn’t believe in Davis’s theory that it was Parker then?”

“Parker indeed,” said my sister, and snorted.

Flora came forward and laid her hand on my arm.

“Oh! Dr. Sheppard, let us go at once to this M. Poirot. He will find
out the truth.”

“My dear Flora,” I said gently, laying my hand on hers. “Are you quite
sure it is the truth we want?”

She looked at me, nodding her head gravely.

“You’re not sure,” she said. “I am. I know Ralph better than you do.”

“Of course he didn’t do it,” said Caroline, who had been keeping silent
with great difficulty. “Ralph may be extravagant, but he’s a dear boy,
and has the nicest manners.”

I wanted to tell Caroline that large numbers of murderers have had
nice manners, but the presence of Flora restrained me. Since the
girl was determined, I was forced to give in to her and we started
at once, getting away before my sister was able to fire off any more
pronouncements beginning with her favorite words, “Of course.”

An old woman with an immense Breton cap opened the door of The Larches
to us. M. Poirot was at home, it seemed.

We were ushered into a little sitting-room arranged with formal
precision, and there, after the lapse of a minute or so, my friend of
yesterday came to us.

“Monsieur le docteur,” he said, smiling. “Mademoiselle.”

He bowed to Flora.

“Perhaps,” I began, “you have heard of the tragedy which occurred last
night.”

His face grew grave.

“But certainly I have heard. It is horrible. I offer mademoiselle all
my sympathy. In what way can I serve you?”

“Miss Ackroyd,” I said, “wants you to—to——”

“To find the murderer,” said Flora in a clear voice.

“I see,” said the little man. “But the police will do that, will they
not?”

“They might make a mistake,” said Flora. “They are on their way to make
a mistake now, I think. Please, M. Poirot, won’t you help us? If—if it
is a question of money——”

Poirot held up his hand.

“Not that, I beg of you, mademoiselle. Not that I do not care for
money.” His eyes showed a momentary twinkle. “Money, it means much to
me and always has done. No, if I go into this, you must understand one
thing clearly. _I shall go through with it to the end._ The good dog,
he does not leave the scent, remember! You may wish that, after all,
you had left it to the local police.”

“I want the truth,” said Flora, looking him straight in the eyes.

“All the truth?”

“All the truth.”

“Then I accept,” said the little man quietly. “And I hope you will not
regret those words. Now, tell me all the circumstances.”

“Dr. Sheppard had better tell you,” said Flora. “He knows more than I
do.”

Thus enjoined, I plunged into a careful narrative, embodying all the
facts I have previously set down. Poirot listened carefully, inserting
a question here and there, but for the most part sitting in silence,
his eyes on the ceiling.

I brought my story to a close with the departure of the inspector and
myself from Fernly Park the previous night.

“And now,” said Flora, as I finished, “tell him all about Ralph.”

I hesitated, but her imperious glance drove me on.

“You went to this inn—this Three Boars—last night on your way home?”
asked Poirot, as I brought my tale to a close. “Now exactly why was
that?”

I paused a moment to choose my words carefully.

“I thought some one ought to inform the young man of his uncle’s death.
It occurred to me after I had left Fernly that possibly no one but
myself and Mr. Ackroyd were aware that he was staying in the village.”

Poirot nodded.

“Quite so. That was your only motive in going there, eh?”

“That was my only motive,” I said stiffly.

“It was not to—shall we say—reassure yourself about _ce jeune homme_?”

“Reassure myself?”

“I think, M. le docteur, that you know very well what I mean, though
you pretend not to do so. I suggest that it would have been a relief
to you if you had found that Captain Paton had been at home all the
evening.”

“Not at all,” I said sharply.

The little detective shook his head at me gravely.

“You have not the trust in me of Miss Flora,” he said. “But no matter.
What we have to look at is this—Captain Paton is missing, under
circumstances which call for an explanation. I will not hide from you
that the matter looks grave. Still, it may admit of a perfectly simple
explanation.”

“That’s just what I keep saying,” cried Flora eagerly.

Poirot touched no more upon that theme. Instead he suggested an
immediate visit to the local police. He thought it better for Flora
to return home, and for me to be the one to accompany him there and
introduce him to the officer in charge of the case.

We carried out this plan forthwith. We found Inspector Davis outside
the police station looking very glum indeed. With him was Colonel
Melrose, the Chief Constable, and another man whom, from Flora’s
description of “weaselly,” I had no difficulty in recognizing as
Inspector Raglan from Cranchester.

I know Melrose fairly well, and I introduced Poirot to him and
explained the situation. The chief constable was clearly vexed, and
Inspector Raglan looked as black as thunder. Davis, however, seemed
slightly exhilarated by the sight of his superior officer’s annoyance.

“The case is going to be plain as a pikestaff,” said Raglan. “Not the
least need for amateurs to come butting in. You’d think any fool would
have seen the way things were last night, and then we shouldn’t have
lost twelve hours.”

He directed a vengeful glance at poor Davis, who received it with
perfect stolidity.

“Mr. Ackroyd’s family must, of course, do what they see fit,” said
Colonel Melrose. “But we cannot have the official investigation
hampered in any way. I know M. Poirot’s great reputation, of course,”
he added courteously.

“The police can’t advertise themselves, worse luck,” said Raglan.

It was Poirot who saved the situation.

“It is true that I have retired from the world,” he said. “I never
intended to take up a case again. Above all things, I have a horror of
publicity. I must beg, that in the case of my being able to contribute
something to the solution of the mystery, my name may not be mentioned.”

Inspector Raglan’s face lightened a little.

“I’ve heard of some very remarkable successes of yours,” observed the
colonel, thawing.

“I have had much experience,” said Poirot quietly. “But most of my
successes have been obtained by the aid of the police. I admire
enormously your English police. If Inspector Raglan permits me to
assist him, I shall be both honored and flattered.”

The inspector’s countenance became still more gracious.

Colonel Melrose drew me aside.

“From all I hear, this little fellow’s done some really remarkable
things,” he murmured. “We’re naturally anxious not to have to call in
Scotland Yard. Raglan seems very sure of himself, but I’m not quite
certain that I agree with him. You see, I—er—know the parties concerned
better than he does. This fellow doesn’t seem out after kudos, does he?
Would work in with us unobtrusively, eh?”

“To the greater glory of Inspector Raglan,” I said solemnly.

“Well, well,” said Colonel Melrose breezily in a louder voice, “we must
put you wise to the latest developments, M. Poirot.”

“I thank you,” said Poirot. “My friend, Dr. Sheppard, said something of
the butler being suspected?”

“That’s all bunkum,” said Raglan instantly. “These high-class servants
get in such a funk that they act suspiciously for nothing at all.”

“The fingerprints?” I hinted.

“Nothing like Parker’s.” He gave a faint smile, and added: “And yours
and Mr. Raymond’s don’t fit either, doctor.”

“What about those of Captain Ralph Paton?” asked Poirot quietly.

I felt a secret admiration for the way he took the bull by the horns. I
saw a look of respect creep into the inspector’s eye.

“I see you don’t let the grass grow under your feet, Mr. Poirot. It
will be a pleasure to work with you, I’m sure. We’re going to take that
young gentleman’s fingerprints as soon as we can lay hands upon him.”

“I can’t help thinking you’re mistaken, inspector,” said Colonel
Melrose warmly. “I’ve known Ralph Paton from a boy upward. He’d never
stoop to murder.”

“Maybe not,” said the inspector tonelessly.

“What have you got against him?” I asked.

“Went out just on nine o’clock last night. Was seen in neighborhood of
Fernly Park somewhere about nine-thirty. Not been seen since. Believed
to be in serious money difficulties. I’ve got a pair of his shoes
here—shoes with rubber studs in them. He had two pairs, almost exactly
alike. I’m going up now to compare them with those footmarks. The
constable is up there seeing that no one tampers with them.”

“We’ll go at once,” said Colonel Melrose. “You and M. Poirot will
accompany us, will you not?”

We assented, and all drove up in the colonel’s car. The inspector was
anxious to get at once to the footmarks, and asked to be put down at
the lodge. About half-way up the drive, on the right, a path branched
off which led round to the terrace and the window of Ackroyd’s study.

“Would you like to go with the inspector, M. Poirot?” asked the chief
constable, “or would you prefer to examine the study?”

Poirot chose the latter alternative. Parker opened the door to us. His
manner was smug and deferential, and he seemed to have recovered from
his panic of the night before.

Colonel Melrose took a key from his pocket, and unlocking the door
which led into the lobby, he ushered us through into the study.

“Except for the removal of the body, M. Poirot, this room is exactly as
it was last night.”

“And the body was found—where?”

As precisely as possible, I described Ackroyd’s position. The arm-chair
still stood in front of the fire.

Poirot went and sat down in it.

“The blue letter you speak of, where was it when you left the room?”

“Mr. Ackroyd had laid it down on this little table at his right hand.”

Poirot nodded.

“Except for that, everything was in its place?”

“Yes, I think so.”

“Colonel Melrose, would you be so extremely obliging as to sit down in
this chair a minute. I thank you. Now, M. le docteur, will you kindly
indicate to me the exact position of the dagger?”

I did so, whilst the little man stood in the doorway.

“The hilt of the dagger was plainly visible from the door then. Both
you and Parker could see it at once?”

“Yes.”

Poirot went next to the window.

“The electric light was on, of course, when you discovered the body?”
he asked over his shoulder.

I assented, and joined him where he was studying the marks on the
window-sill.

“The rubber studs are the same pattern as those in Captain Paton’s
shoes,” he said quietly.

Then he came back once more to the middle of the room. His eye traveled
round, searching everything in the room with a quick, trained glance.

“Are you a man of good observation, Dr. Sheppard?” he asked at last.

“I think so,” I said, surprised.

“There was a fire in the grate, I see. When you broke the door down and
found Mr. Ackroyd dead, how was the fire? Was it low?”

I gave a vexed laugh.

“I—I really can’t say. I didn’t notice. Perhaps Mr. Raymond or Major
Blunt——”

The little man opposite me shook his head with a faint smile.

“One must always proceed with method. I made an error of judgment in
asking you that question. To each man his own knowledge. You could tell
me the details of the patient’s appearance—nothing there would escape
you. If I wanted information about the papers on that desk, Mr. Raymond
would have noticed anything there was to see. To find out about the
fire, I must ask the man whose business it is to observe such things.
You permit——”

He moved swiftly to the fireplace and rang the bell.

After a lapse of a minute or two Parker appeared.

“The bell rang, sir,” he said hesitatingly.

“Come in, Parker,” said Colonel Melrose. “This gentleman wants to ask
you something.”

Parker transferred a respectful attention to Poirot.

“Parker,” said the little man, “when you broke down the door with Dr.
Sheppard last night, and found your master dead, what was the state of
the fire?”

Parker replied without a pause.

“It had burned very low, sir. It was almost out.”

“Ah!” said Poirot. The exclamation sounded almost triumphant. He went
on:—

“Look round you, my good Parker. Is this room exactly as it was then?”

The butler’s eye swept round. It came to rest on the windows.

“The curtains were drawn, sir, and the electric light was on.”

Poirot nodded approval.

“Anything else?”

“Yes, sir, this chair was drawn out a little more.”

He indicated a big grandfather chair to the left of the door between it
and the window. I append a plan of the room with the chair in question
marked with an X.

“Just show me,” said Poirot.

[Illustration:

  +----------------      +-----------------+
  |    +           DOOR /  GRANDFATHER     |
  |   / \              /   CHAIR   +---+   |
  |  /   +                          ]  |   |
  | +   / SMALL                  X  ]  |   |
  |  \ /  TABLE                    +---+   |
  |   +                                    |
  +++                                      |
  |||  +---+ CHAIR IN WHICH          ___   |
  |||   ]  | ACKROYD WAS            /   \  |
  |||  +---+ FOUND           TABLE |     | |
  |||                               \___/  |
  |||                                      |
  |||                                      |
  +++  +---+                           +   |
  | ^   ]  | CHAIR IN WHICH           / \  |
  | |  +---+ SHEPPARD SAT          / /   + |
  | |                               /   /  |
  | |                       DESK & +   /   |
  | |   FIREPLACE           CHAIR   \ /    |
  | +------------                    +     |
  +----------------------------------------+
]

The butler drew the chair in question out a good two feet from the
wall, turning it so that the seat faced the door.

“_Voilà ce qui est curieux_,” murmured Poirot. “No one would want to
sit in a chair in such a position, I fancy. Now who pushed it back into
place again, I wonder? Did you, my friend?”

“No, sir,” said Parker. “I was too upset with seeing the master and
all.”

Poirot looked across at me.

“Did you, doctor?”

I shook my head.

“It was back in position when I arrived with the police, sir,” put in
Parker. “I’m sure of that.”

“Curious,” said Poirot again.

“Raymond or Blunt must have pushed it back,” I suggested. “Surely it
isn’t important?”

“It is completely unimportant,” said Poirot. “That is why it is so
interesting,” he added softly.

“Excuse me a minute,” said Colonel Melrose. He left the room with
Parker.

“Do you think Parker is speaking the truth?” I asked.

“About the chair, yes. Otherwise I do not know. You will find, M. le
docteur, if you have much to do with cases of this kind, that they all
resemble each other in one thing.”

“What is that?” I asked curiously.

“Every one concerned in them has something to hide.”

“Have I?” I asked, smiling.

Poirot looked at me attentively.

“I think you have,” he said quietly.

“But——”

“Have you told me everything known to you about this young man Paton?”
He smiled as I grew red. “Oh! do not fear. I will not press you. I
shall learn it in good time.”

“I wish you’d tell me something of your methods,” I said hastily, to
cover my confusion. “The point about the fire, for instance?”

“Oh! that was very simple. You leave Mr. Ackroyd at—ten minutes to
nine, was it not?”

“Yes, exactly, I should say.”

“The window is then closed and bolted and the door unlocked. At a
quarter past ten when the body is discovered, the door is locked and
the window is open. Who opened it? Clearly only Mr. Ackroyd himself
could have done so, and for one of two reasons. Either because the room
became unbearably hot (but since the fire was nearly out and there was
a sharp drop in temperature last night, that cannot be the reason),
or because he admitted some one that way. And if he admitted some one
that way, it must have been some one well known to him, since he had
previously shown himself uneasy on the subject of that same window.”

“It sounds very simple,” I said.

“Everything is simple, if you arrange the facts methodically. We are
concerned now with the personality of the person who was with him at
nine-thirty last night. Everything goes to show that that was the
individual admitted by the window, and though Mr. Ackroyd was seen
alive later by Miss Flora, we cannot approach a solution of the mystery
until we know who that visitor was. The window may have been left open
after his departure and so afforded entrance to the murderer, or the
same person may have returned a second time. Ah! here is the colonel
who returns.”

Colonel Melrose entered with an animated manner.

“That telephone call has been traced at last,” he said. “It did not
come from here. It was put through to Dr. Sheppard at 10.15 last night
from a public call office at King’s Abbot station. And at 10.23 the
night mail leaves for Liverpool.”




                             CHAPTER VIII

                     INSPECTOR RAGLAN IS CONFIDENT


We looked at each other.

“You’ll have inquiries made at the station, of course?” I said.

“Naturally, but I’m not over sanguine as to the result. You know what
that station is like.”

I did. King’s Abbot is a mere village, but its station happens to
be an important junction. Most of the big expresses stop there, and
trains are shunted, re-sorted, and made up. It has two or three public
telephone boxes. At that time of night three local trains come in
close upon each other, to catch the connection with the express for
the north which comes in at 10.19 and leaves at 10.23. The whole place
is in a bustle, and the chances of one particular person being noticed
telephoning or getting into the express are very small indeed.

“But why telephone at all?” demanded Melrose. “That is what I find so
extraordinary. There seems no rhyme or reason in the thing.”

Poirot carefully straightened a china ornament on one of the bookcases.

“Be sure there was a reason,” he said over his shoulder.

“But what reason could it be?”

“When we know that, we shall know everything. This case is very curious
and very interesting.”

There was something almost indescribable in the way he said those last
words. I felt that he was looking at the case from some peculiar angle
of his own, and what he saw I could not tell.

He went to the window and stood there, looking out.

“You say it was nine o’clock, Dr. Sheppard, when you met this stranger
outside the gate?”

He asked the question without turning round.

“Yes,” I replied. “I heard the church clock chime the hour.”

“How long would it take him to reach the house—to reach this window,
for instance?”

“Five minutes at the outside. Two or three minutes only if he took the
path at the right of the drive and came straight here.”

“But to do that he would have to know the way. How can I explain
myself?—it would mean that he had been here before—that he knew his
surroundings.”

“That is true,” replied Colonel Melrose.

“We could find out, doubtless, if Mr. Ackroyd had received any
strangers during the past week?”

“Young Raymond could tell us that,” I said.

“Or Parker,” suggested Colonel Melrose.

“_Ou tous les deux_,” suggested Poirot, smiling.

Colonel Melrose went in search of Raymond, and I rang the bell once
more for Parker.

Colonel Melrose returned almost immediately, accompanied by the young
secretary, whom he introduced to Poirot. Geoffrey Raymond was fresh and
debonair as ever. He seemed surprised and delighted to make Poirot’s
acquaintance.

“No idea you’d been living among us incognito, M. Poirot,” he said. “It
will be a great privilege to watch you at work——Hallo, what’s this?”

Poirot had been standing just to the left of the door. Now he moved
aside suddenly, and I saw that while my back was turned he must have
swiftly drawn out the arm-chair till it stood in the position Parker
had indicated.

“Want me to sit in the chair whilst you take a blood test?” asked
Raymond good-humoredly. “What’s the idea?”

“M. Raymond, this chair was pulled out—so—last night when Mr. Ackroyd
was found killed. Some one moved it back again into place. Did you do
so?”

The secretary’s reply came without a second’s hesitation.

“No, indeed I didn’t. I don’t even remember that it was in that
position, but it must have been if you say so. Anyway, somebody else
must have moved it back to its proper place. Have they destroyed a clew
in doing so? Too bad!”

“It is of no consequence,” said the detective. “Of no consequence
whatever. What I really want to ask you is this, M. Raymond: Did any
stranger come to see Mr. Ackroyd during this past week?”

The secretary reflected for a minute or two, knitting his brows, and
during the pause Parker appeared in answer to the bell.

“No,” said Raymond at last. “I can’t remember any one. Can you, Parker?”

“I beg your pardon, sir?”

“Any stranger coming to see Mr. Ackroyd this week?”

The butler reflected for a minute or two.

“There was the young man who came on Wednesday, sir,” he said at last.
“From Curtis and Troute, I understood he was.”

Raymond moved this aside with an impatient hand.

“Oh! yes, I remember, but that is not the kind of stranger this
gentleman means.” He turned to Poirot. “Mr. Ackroyd had some idea of
purchasing a dictaphone,” he explained. “It would have enabled us to
get through a lot more work in a limited time. The firm in question
sent down their representative, but nothing came of it. Mr. Ackroyd did
not make up his mind to purchase.”

Poirot turned to the butler.

“Can you describe this young man to me, my good Parker?”

“He was fair-haired, sir, and short. Very neatly dressed in a blue
serge suit. A very presentable young man, sir, for his station in life.”

Poirot turned to me.

“The man you met outside the gate, doctor, was tall, was he not?”

“Yes,” I said. “Somewhere about six feet, I should say.”

“There is nothing in that, then,” declared the Belgian. “I thank you,
Parker.”

The butler spoke to Raymond.

“Mr. Hammond has just arrived, sir,” he said. “He is anxious to know if
he can be of any service, and he would be glad to have a word with you.”

“I’ll come at once,” said the young man. He hurried out. Poirot looked
inquiringly at the chief constable.

“The family solicitor, M. Poirot,” said the latter.

“It is a busy time for this young M. Raymond,” murmured M. Poirot. “He
has the air efficient, that one.”

“I believe Mr. Ackroyd considered him a most able secretary.”

“He has been here—how long?”

“Just on two years, I fancy.”

“His duties he fulfills punctiliously. Of that I am sure. In what
manner does he amuse himself? Does he go in for _le sport_?”

“Private secretaries haven’t much time for that sort of thing,” said
Colonel Melrose, smiling. “Raymond plays golf, I believe. And tennis in
the summer time.”

“He does not attend the courses—I should say the running of the horses?”

“Race meetings? No, I don’t think he’s interested in racing.”

Poirot nodded and seemed to lose interest. He glanced slowly round the
study.

“I have seen, I think, all that there is to be seen here.”

I, too, looked round.

“If those walls could speak,” I murmured.

Poirot shook his head.

“A tongue is not enough,” he said. “They would have to have also eyes
and ears. But do not be too sure that these dead things”—he touched
the top of the bookcase as he spoke—“are always dumb. To me they speak
sometimes—chairs, tables—they have their message!”

He turned away towards the door.

“What message?” I cried. “What have they said to you to-day?”

He looked over his shoulder and raised one eyebrow quizzically.

“An opened window,” he said. “A locked door. A chair that apparently
moved itself. To all three I say, ‘Why?’ and I find no answer.”

He shook his head, puffed out his chest, and stood blinking at us. He
looked ridiculously full of his own importance. It crossed my mind
to wonder whether he was really any good as a detective. Had his big
reputation been built up on a series of lucky chances?

I think the same thought must have occurred to Colonel Melrose, for he
frowned.

“Anything more you want to see, M. Poirot?” he inquired brusquely.

“You would perhaps be so kind as to show me the silver table from which
the weapon was taken? After that, I will trespass on your kindness no
longer.”

We went to the drawing-room, but on the way the constable waylaid the
colonel, and after a muttered conversation the latter excused himself
and left us together. I showed Poirot the silver table, and after
raising the lid once or twice and letting it fall, he pushed open the
window and stepped out on the terrace. I followed him.

Inspector Raglan had just turned the corner of the house, and was
coming towards us. His face looked grim and satisfied.

“So there you are, M. Poirot,” he said. “Well, this isn’t going to be
much of a case. I’m sorry, too. A nice enough young fellow gone wrong.”

Poirot’s face fell, and he spoke very mildly.

“I’m afraid I shall not be able to be of much aid to you, then?”

“Next time, perhaps,” said the inspector soothingly. “Though we don’t
have murders every day in this quiet little corner of the world.”

Poirot’s gaze took on an admiring quality.

“You have been of a marvelous promptness,” he observed. “How exactly
did you go to work, if I may ask?”

“Certainly,” said the inspector. “To begin with—method. That’s what I
always say—method!”

“Ah!” cried the other. “That, too, is my watchword. Method, order, and
the little gray cells.”

“The cells?” said the inspector, staring.

“The little gray cells of the brain,” explained the Belgian.

“Oh, of course; well, we all use them, I suppose.”

“In a greater or lesser degree,” murmured Poirot. “And there are, too,
differences in quality. Then there is the psychology of a crime. One
must study that.”

“Ah!” said the inspector, “you’ve been bitten with all this
psychoanalysis stuff? Now, I’m a plain man——”

“Mrs. Raglan would not agree, I am sure, to that,” said Poirot, making
him a little bow.

Inspector Raglan, a little taken aback, bowed.

“You don’t understand,” he said, grinning broadly. “Lord, what a lot of
difference language makes. I’m telling you how I set to work. First of
all, method. Mr. Ackroyd was last seen alive at a quarter to ten by his
niece, Miss Flora Ackroyd. That’s fact number one, isn’t it?”

“If you say so.”

“Well, it is. At half-past ten, the doctor here says that Mr. Ackroyd
has been dead at least half an hour. You stick to that, doctor?”

“Certainly,” I said. “Half an hour or longer.”

“Very good. That gives us exactly a quarter of an hour in which the
crime must have been committed. I make a list of every one in the
house, and work through it, setting down opposite their names where
they were and what they were doing between the hour of 9.45 and 10 p.m.”

He handed a sheet of paper to Poirot. I read it over his shoulder. It
ran as follows, written in a neat script:—

  _Major Blunt.—In billiard room with Mr. Raymond. (Latter confirms.)_

  _Mr. Raymond.—Billiard room. (See above.)_

  _Mrs. Ackroyd.—9.45 watching billiard match. Went up to bed 9.55.
      (Raymond and Blunt watched her up staircase.)_

  _Miss Ackroyd.—Went straight from her uncle’s room upstairs.
      (Confirmed by Parker, also housemaid, Elsie Dale.)_

  _Servants_:—

    _Parker.—Went straight to butler’s pantry. (Confirmed by
      housekeeper, Miss Russell, who came down to speak to him about
      something at 9.47, and remained at least ten minutes.)_

    _Miss Russell.—As above. Spoke to housemaid, Elsie Dale, upstairs
      at 9.45._

    _Ursula Bourne (parlormaid).—In her own room until 9.55. Then in
      Servants’ Hall._

    _Mrs. Cooper (cook).—In Servants’ Hall._

    _Gladys Jones (second housemaid).—In Servants’ Hall._

    _Elsie Dale.—Upstairs in bedroom. Seen there by Miss Russell and
      Miss Flora Ackroyd._

    _Mary Thripp (kitchenmaid).—Servants’ Hall._

“The cook has been here seven years, the parlormaid eighteen months,
and Parker just over a year. The others are new. Except for something
fishy about Parker, they all seem quite all right.”

“A very complete list,” said Poirot, handing it back to him. “I am
quite sure that Parker did not do the murder,” he added gravely.

“So is my sister,” I struck in. “And she’s usually right.” Nobody paid
any attention to my interpolation.

“That disposes pretty effectually of the household,” continued the
inspector. “Now we come to a very grave point. The woman at the
lodge—Mary Black—was pulling the curtains last night when she saw
Ralph Paton turn in at the gate and go up towards the house.”

“She is sure of that?” I asked sharply.

“Quite sure. She knows him well by sight. He went past very quickly
and turned off by the path to the right, which is a short cut to the
terrace.”

“And what time was that?” asked Poirot, who had sat with an immovable
face.

“Exactly twenty-five minutes past nine,” said the inspector gravely.

There was a silence. Then the inspector spoke again.

“It’s all clear enough. It fits in without a flaw. At twenty-five
minutes past nine, Captain Paton is seen passing the lodge; at
nine-thirty or thereabouts, Mr. Geoffrey Raymond hears some one in here
asking for money and Mr. Ackroyd refusing. What happens next? Captain
Paton leaves the same way—through the window. He walks along the
terrace, angry and baffled. He comes to the open drawing-room window.
Say it’s now a quarter to ten. Miss Flora Ackroyd is saying good-night
to her uncle. Major Blunt, Mr. Raymond, and Mrs. Ackroyd are in the
billiard room. The drawing-room is empty. He steals in, takes the
dagger from the silver table, and returns to the study window. He slips
off his shoes, climbs in, and—well, I don’t need to go into details.
Then he slips out again and goes off. Hadn’t the nerve to go back to
the inn. He makes for the station, rings up from there——”

“Why?” said Poirot softly.

I jumped at the interruption. The little man was leaning forward. His
eyes shone with a queer green light.

For a moment Inspector Raglan was taken aback by the question.

“It’s difficult to say exactly why he did that,” he said at last. “But
murderers do funny things. You’d know that if you were in the police
force. The cleverest of them make stupid mistakes sometimes. But come
along and I’ll show you those footprints.”

We followed him round the corner of the terrace to the study window. At
a word from Raglan a police constable produced the shoes which had been
obtained from the local inn.

The inspector laid them over the marks.

“They’re the same,” he said confidently. “That is to say, they’re not
the same pair that actually made these prints. He went away in those.
This is a pair just like them, but older—see how the studs are worn
down.”

“Surely a great many people wear shoes with rubber studs in them?”
asked Poirot.

“That’s so, of course,” said the inspector. “I shouldn’t put so much
stress on the footmarks if it wasn’t for everything else.”

“A very foolish young man, Captain Ralph Paton,” said Poirot
thoughtfully. “To leave so much evidence of his presence.”

“Ah! well,” said the inspector, “it was a dry, fine night, you know. He
left no prints on the terrace or on the graveled path. But, unluckily
for him, a spring must have welled up just lately at the end of the
path from the drive. See here.”

A small graveled path joined the terrace a few feet away. In one
spot, a few yards from its termination, the ground was wet and boggy.
Crossing this wet place there were again the marks of footsteps, and
amongst them the shoes with rubber studs.

Poirot followed the path on a little way, the inspector by his side.

“You noticed the women’s footprints?” he said suddenly.

The inspector laughed.

“Naturally. But several different women have walked this way—and men
as well. It’s a regular short cut to the house, you see. It would be
impossible to sort out all the footsteps. After all, it’s the ones on
the window-sill that are really important.”

Poirot nodded.

“It’s no good going farther,” said the inspector, as we came in view of
the drive. “It’s all graveled again here, and hard as it can be.”

Again Poirot nodded, but his eyes were fixed on a small garden house—a
kind of superior summer-house. It was a little to the left of the path
ahead of us, and a graveled walk ran up to it.

Poirot lingered about until the inspector had gone back towards the
house. Then he looked at me.

“You must have indeed been sent from the good God to replace my
friend Hastings,” he said, with a twinkle. “I observe that you do not
quit my side. How say you, Dr. Sheppard, shall we investigate that
summer-house? It interests me.”

He went up to the door and opened it. Inside, the place was almost
dark. There were one or two rustic seats, a croquet set, and some
folded deck-chairs.

I was startled to observe my new friend. He had dropped to his hands
and knees and was crawling about the floor. Every now and then he shook
his head as though not satisfied. Finally, he sat back on his heels.

“Nothing,” he murmured. “Well, perhaps it was not to be expected. But
it would have meant so much——”

He broke off, stiffening all over. Then he stretched out his hand to
one of the rustic chairs. He detached something from one side of it.

“What is it?” I cried. “What have you found?”

He smiled, unclosing his hand so that I should see what lay in the palm
of it. A scrap of stiff white cambric.

I took it from him, looked at it curiously, and then handed it back.

“What do you make of it, eh, my friend?” he asked, eyeing me keenly.

“A scrap torn from a handkerchief,” I suggested, shrugging my shoulders.

He made another dart and picked up a small quill—a goose quill by the
look of it.

“And that?” he cried triumphantly. “What do you make of that?”

I only stared.

He slipped the quill into his pocket, and looked again at the scrap of
white stuff.

“A fragment of a handkerchief?” he mused. “Perhaps you are right. But
remember this—_a good laundry does not starch a handkerchief_.”

He nodded at me triumphantly, then he put away the scrap carefully in
his pocket-book.




                              CHAPTER IX

                           THE GOLDFISH POND


We walked back to the house together. There was no sign of the
inspector. Poirot paused on the terrace and stood with his back to the
house, slowly turning his head from side to side.

“_Une belle propriété_,” he said at last appreciatively. “Who inherits
it?”

His words gave me almost a shock. It is an odd thing, but until that
moment the question of inheritance had never come into my head. Poirot
watched me keenly.

“It is a new idea to you, that,” he said at last. “You had not thought
of it before—eh?”

“No,” I said truthfully. “I wish I had.”

He looked at me again curiously.

“I wonder just what you mean by that,” he said thoughtfully. “Ah! no,”
as I was about to speak. “_Inutile!_ You would not tell me your real
thought.”

“Every one has something to hide,” I quoted, smiling.

“Exactly.”

“You still believe that?”

“More than ever, my friend. But it is not easy to hide things from
Hercule Poirot. He has a knack of finding out.”

He descended the steps of the Dutch garden as he spoke.

“Let us walk a little,” he said over his shoulder. “The air is pleasant
to-day.”

I followed him. He led me down a path to the left enclosed in yew
hedges. A walk led down the middle, bordered each side with formal
flower beds, and at the end was a round paved recess with a seat and
a pond of goldfish. Instead of pursuing the path to the end, Poirot
took another which wound up the side of a wooded slope. In one spot the
trees had been cleared away, and a seat had been put. Sitting there one
had a splendid view over the countryside, and one looked right down on
the paved recess and the goldfish pond.

“England is very beautiful,” said Poirot, his eyes straying over the
prospect. Then he smiled. “And so are English girls,” he said in a
lower tone. “Hush, my friend, and look at the pretty picture below us.”

It was then that I saw Flora. She was moving along the path we had
just left and she was humming a little snatch of song. Her step was
more dancing than walking, and in spite of her black dress, there was
nothing but joy in her whole attitude. She gave a sudden pirouette on
her toes, and her black draperies swung out. At the same time she flung
her head back and laughed outright.

As she did so a man stepped out from the trees. It was Hector Blunt.

The girl started. Her expression changed a little.

“How you startled me—I didn’t see you.”

Blunt said nothing, but stood looking at her for a minute or two in
silence.

“What I like about you,” said Flora, with a touch of malice, “is your
cheery conversation.”

I fancy that at that Blunt reddened under his tan. His voice, when he
spoke, sounded different—it had a curious sort of humility in it.

“Never was much of a fellow for talking. Not even when I was young.”

“That was a very long time ago, I suppose,” said Flora gravely.

I caught the undercurrent of laughter in her voice, but I don’t think
Blunt did.

“Yes,” he said simply, “it was.”

“How does it feel to be Methuselah?” asked Flora.

This time the laughter was more apparent, but Blunt was following out
an idea of his own.

“Remember the Johnny who sold his soul to the devil? In return for
being made young again? There’s an opera about it.”

“Faust, you mean?”

“That’s the beggar. Rum story. Some of us would do it if we could.”

“Any one would think you were creaking at the joints to hear you talk,”
cried Flora, half vexed, half amused.

Blunt said nothing for a minute or two. Then he looked away from Flora
into the middle distance and observed to an adjacent tree trunk that it
was about time he got back to Africa.

“Are you going on another expedition—shooting things?”

“Expect so. Usually do, you know—shoot things, I mean.”

“You shot that head in the hall, didn’t you?”

Blunt nodded. Then he jerked out, going rather red, as he did so:—

“Care for some decent skins any time? If so, I could get ’em for you.”

“Oh! please do,” cried Flora. “Will you really? You won’t forget?”

“I shan’t forget,” said Hector Blunt.

He added, in a sudden burst of communicativeness:—

“Time I went. I’m no good in this sort of life. Haven’t got the manners
for it. I’m a rough fellow, no use in society. Never remember the
things one’s expected to say. Yes, time I went.”

“But you’re not going at once,” cried Flora. “Not—not while we’re in
all this trouble. Oh! please. If you go——”

She turned away a little.

“You want me to stay?” asked Blunt.

He spoke deliberately but quite simply.

“We all——”

“I meant you personally,” said Blunt, with directness.

Flora turned slowly back again and met his eyes.

“I want you to stay,” she said, “if—if that makes any difference.”

“It makes all the difference,” said Blunt.

There was a moment’s silence. They sat down on the stone seat by the
goldfish pond. It seemed as though neither of them knew quite what to
say next.

“It—it’s such a lovely morning,” said Flora at last. “You know, I can’t
help feeling happy, in spite—in spite of everything. That’s awful, I
suppose?”

“Quite natural,” said Blunt. “Never saw your uncle until two years ago,
did you? Can’t be expected to grieve very much. Much better to have no
humbug about it.”

“There’s something awfully consoling about you,” said Flora. “You make
things so simple.”

“Things are simple as a rule,” said the big game hunter.

“Not always,” said Flora.

Her voice had lowered itself, and I saw Blunt turn and look at her,
bringing his eyes back from (apparently) the coast of Africa to do so.
He evidently put his own construction on her change of tone, for he
said, after a minute or two, in rather an abrupt manner:—

“I say, you know, you mustn’t worry. About that young chap, I mean.
Inspector’s an ass. Everybody knows—utterly absurd to think he could
have done it. Man from outside. Burglar chap. That’s the only possible
solution.”

Flora turned to look at him.

“You really think so?”

“Don’t you?” said Blunt quickly.

“I—oh, yes, of course.”

Another silence, and then Flora burst out:—

“I’m—I’ll tell you why I felt so happy this morning. However heartless
you think me, I’d rather tell you. It’s because the lawyer has been—Mr.
Hammond. He told us about the will. Uncle Roger has left me twenty
thousand pounds. Think of it—twenty thousand beautiful pounds.”

Blunt looked surprised.

“Does it mean so much to you?”

“Mean much to me? Why, it’s everything. Freedom—life—no more scheming
and scraping and lying——”

“Lying?” said Blunt, sharply interrupting.

Flora seemed taken aback for a minute.

“You know what I mean,” she said uncertainly. “Pretending to be
thankful for all the nasty castoff things rich relations give you. Last
year’s coats and skirts and hats.”

“Don’t know much about ladies’ clothes; should have said you were
always very well turned out.”

“It’s cost me something, though,” said Flora in a low voice. “Don’t
let’s talk of horrid things. I’m so happy. I’m free. Free to do what I
like. Free not to——”

She stopped suddenly.

“Not to what?” asked Blunt quickly.

“I forget now. Nothing important.”

Blunt had a stick in his hand, and he thrust it into the pond, poking
at something.

“What are you doing, Major Blunt?”

“There’s something bright down there. Wondered what it was—looks like a
gold brooch. Now I’ve stirred up the mud and it’s gone.”

“Perhaps it’s a crown,” suggested Flora. “Like the one Mélisande saw in
the water.”

“Mélisande,” said Blunt reflectively—“she’s in an opera, isn’t she?”

“Yes, you seem to know a lot about operas.”

“People take me sometimes,” said Blunt sadly. “Funny idea of
pleasure—worse racket than the natives make with their tom-toms.”

Flora laughed.

“I remember Mélisande,” continued Blunt, “married an old chap old
enough to be her father.”

He threw a small piece of flint into the goldfish pond. Then, with a
change of manner, he turned to Flora.

“Miss Ackroyd, can I do anything? About Paton, I mean. I know how
dreadfully anxious you must be.”

“Thank you,” said Flora in a cold voice. “There is really nothing to
be done. Ralph will be all right. I’ve got hold of the most wonderful
detective in the world, and he’s going to find out all about it.”

For some time I had felt uneasy as to our position. We were not exactly
eavesdropping, since the two in the garden below had only to lift their
heads to see us. Nevertheless, I should have drawn attention to our
presence before now, had not my companion put a warning pressure on my
arm. Clearly he wished me to remain silent.

But now he rose briskly to his feet, clearing his throat.

“I demand pardon,” he cried. “I cannot allow mademoiselle thus
extravagantly to compliment me, and not draw attention to my presence.
They say the listener hears no good of himself, but that is not the
case this time. To spare my blushes, I must join you and apologize.”

He hurried down the path with me close behind him, and joined the
others by the pond.

“This is M. Hercule Poirot,” said Flora. “I expect you’ve heard of him.”

Poirot bowed.

“I know Major Blunt by reputation,” he said politely. “I am glad to
have encountered you, monsieur. I am in need of some information that
you can give me.”

Blunt looked at him inquiringly.

“When did you last see M. Ackroyd alive?”

“At dinner.”

“And you neither saw nor heard anything of him after that?”

“Didn’t see him. Heard his voice.”

“How was that?”

“I strolled out on the terrace——”

“Pardon me, what time was this?”

“About half-past nine. I was walking up and down smoking in front of
the drawing-room window. I heard Ackroyd talking in his study——”

Poirot stooped and removed a microscopic weed.

“Surely you couldn’t hear voices in the study from that part of the
terrace,” he murmured.

He was not looking at Blunt, but I was, and to my intense surprise, I
saw the latter flush.

“Went as far as the corner,” he explained unwillingly.

“Ah! indeed?” said Poirot.

In the mildest manner he conveyed an impression that more was wanted.

“Thought I saw—a woman disappearing into the bushes. Just a gleam of
white, you know. Must have been mistaken. It was while I was standing
at the corner of the terrace that I heard Ackroyd’s voice speaking to
that secretary of his.”

“Speaking to Mr. Geoffrey Raymond?”

“Yes—that’s what I supposed at the time. Seems I was wrong.”

“Mr. Ackroyd didn’t address him by name?”

“Oh, no.”

“Then, if I may ask, why did you think——?”

Blunt explained laboriously.

“Took it for granted that it _would_ be Raymond, because he had said
just before I came out that he was taking some papers to Ackroyd. Never
thought of it being anybody else.”

“Can you remember what the words you heard were?”

“Afraid I can’t. Something quite ordinary and unimportant. Only caught
a scrap of it. I was thinking of something else at the time.”

“It is of no importance,” murmured Poirot. “Did you move a chair back
against the wall when you went into the study after the body was
discovered?”

“Chair? No—why should I?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders but did not answer. He turned to Flora.

“There is one thing I should like to know from you, mademoiselle. When
you were examining the things in the silver table with Dr. Sheppard,
was the dagger in its place, or was it not?”

Flora’s chin shot up.

“Inspector Raglan has been asking me that,” she said resentfully. “I’ve
told him, and I’ll tell you. I’m perfectly certain the dagger was _not_
there. He thinks it was and that Ralph sneaked it later in the evening.
And—and he doesn’t believe me. He thinks I’m saying it to—to shield
Ralph.”

“And aren’t you?” I asked gravely.

Flora stamped her foot.

“You, too, Dr. Sheppard! Oh! it’s too bad.”

Poirot tactfully made a diversion.

“It is true what I heard you say, Major Blunt. There is something that
glitters in this pond. Let us see if I can reach it.”

He knelt down by the pond, baring his arm to the elbow, and lowered it
in very slowly, so as not to disturb the bottom of the pond. But in
spite of all his precautions the mud eddied and swirled, and he was
forced to draw his arm out again empty-handed.

He gazed ruefully at the mud upon his arm. I offered him my
handkerchief, which he accepted with fervent protestations of thanks.
Blunt looked at his watch.

“Nearly lunch time,” he said. “We’d better be getting back to the
house.”

“You will lunch with us, M. Poirot?” asked Flora. “I should like you to
meet my mother. She is—very fond of Ralph.”

The little man bowed.

“I shall be delighted, mademoiselle.”

“And you will stay, too, won’t you, Dr. Sheppard?”

I hesitated.

“Oh, do!”

I wanted to, so I accepted the invitation without further ceremony.

We set out towards the house, Flora and Blunt walking ahead.

“What hair,” said Poirot to me in a low tone, nodding towards Flora.
“The real gold! They will make a pretty couple. She and the dark,
handsome Captain Paton. Will they not?”

I looked at him inquiringly, but he began to fuss about a few
microscopic drops of water on his coat sleeve. The man reminded me in
some ways of a cat. His green eyes and his finicking habits.

“And all for nothing, too,” I said sympathetically. “I wonder what it
was in the pond?”

“Would you like to see?” asked Poirot.

I stared at him. He nodded.

“My good friend,” he said gently and reproachfully, “Hercule Poirot
does not run the risk of disarranging his costume without being sure
of attaining his object. To do so would be ridiculous and absurd. I am
never ridiculous.”

“But you brought your hand out empty,” I objected.

“There are times when it is necessary to have discretion. Do you tell
your patients everything—everything, doctor? I think not. Nor do you
tell your excellent sister everything either, is it not so? Before
showing my empty hand, I dropped what it contained into my other hand.
You shall see what that was.”

He held out his left hand, palm open. On it lay a little circlet of
gold. A woman’s wedding ring.

I took it from him.

“Look inside,” commanded Poirot.

I did so. Inside was an inscription in fine writing:—

                         _From R., March 13th._

I looked at Poirot, but he was busy inspecting his appearance in a tiny
pocket glass. He paid particular attention to his mustaches, and none
at all to me. I saw that he did not intend to be communicative.




                               CHAPTER X

                            THE PARLORMAID


We found Mrs. Ackroyd in the hall. With her was a small dried-up little
man, with an aggressive chin and sharp gray eyes, and “lawyer” written
all over him.

“Mr. Hammond is staying to lunch with us,” said Mrs. Ackroyd. “You know
Major Blunt, Mr. Hammond? And dear Dr. Sheppard—also a close friend of
poor Roger’s. And, let me see——”

She paused, surveying Hercule Poirot in some perplexity.

“This is M. Poirot, mother,” said Flora. “I told you about him this
morning.”

“Oh! yes,” said Mrs. Ackroyd vaguely. “Of course, my dear, of course.
He is to find Ralph, is he not?”

“He is to find out who killed uncle,” said Flora.

“Oh! my dear,” cried her mother. “Please! My poor nerves. I am a wreck
this morning, a positive wreck. Such a dreadful thing to happen. I
can’t help feeling that it must have been an accident of some kind.
Roger was so fond of handling queer curios. His hand must have slipped,
or something.”

This theory was received in polite silence. I saw Poirot edge up to the
lawyer, and speak to him in a confidential undertone. They moved aside
into the embrasure of the window. I joined them—then hesitated.

“Perhaps I’m intruding,” I said.

“Not at all,” cried Poirot heartily. “You and I, M. le docteur, we
investigate this affair side by side. Without you I should be lost. I
desire a little information from the good Mr. Hammond.”

“You are acting on behalf of Captain Ralph Paton, I understand,” said
the lawyer cautiously.

Poirot shook his head.

“Not so. I am acting in the interests of justice. Miss Ackroyd has
asked me to investigate the death of her uncle.”

Mr. Hammond seemed slightly taken aback.

“I cannot seriously believe that Captain Paton can be concerned in this
crime,” he said, “however strong the circumstantial evidence against
him may be. The mere fact that he was hard pressed for money——”

“Was he hard pressed for money?” interpolated Poirot quickly.

The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.

“It was a chronic condition with Ralph Paton,” he said dryly. “Money
went through his hands like water. He was always applying to his
stepfather.”

“Had he done so of late? During the last year, for instance?”

“I cannot say. Mr. Ackroyd did not mention the fact to me.”

“I comprehend. Mr. Hammond, I take it that you are acquainted with the
provisions of Mr. Ackroyd’s will?”

“Certainly. That is my principal business here to-day.”

“Then, seeing that I am acting for Miss Ackroyd, you will not object to
telling me the terms of that will?”

“They are quite simple. Shorn of legal phraseology, and after paying
certain legacies and bequests——”

“Such as——?” interrupted Poirot.

Mr. Hammond seemed a little surprised.

“A thousand pounds to his housekeeper, Miss Russell; fifty pounds
to the cook, Emma Cooper; five hundred pounds to his secretary, Mr.
Geoffrey Raymond. Then to various hospitals——”

Poirot held up his hand.

“Ah! the charitable bequests, they interest me not.”

“Quite so. The income on ten thousand pounds’ worth of shares to be
paid to Mrs. Cecil Ackroyd during her lifetime. Miss Flora Ackroyd
inherits twenty thousand pounds outright. The residue—including this
property, and the shares in Ackroyd and Son—to his adopted son, Ralph
Paton.”

“Mr. Ackroyd possessed a large fortune?”

“A very large fortune. Captain Paton will be an exceedingly wealthy
young man.”

There was a silence. Poirot and the lawyer looked at each other.

“Mr. Hammond,” came Mrs. Ackroyd’s voice plaintively from the fireplace.

The lawyer answered the summons. Poirot took my arm and drew me right
into the window.

“Regard the irises,” he remarked in rather a loud voice. “Magnificent,
are they not? A straight and pleasing effect.”

At the same time I felt the pressure of his hand on my arm, and he
added in a low tone:—

“Do you really wish to aid me? To take part in this investigation?”

“Yes, indeed,” I said eagerly. “There’s nothing I should like better.
You don’t know what a dull old fogey’s life I lead. Never anything out
of the ordinary.”

“Good, we will be colleagues then. In a minute or two I fancy Major
Blunt will join us. He is not happy with the good mamma. Now there are
some things I want to know—but I do not wish to seem to want to know
them. You comprehend? So it will be your part to ask the questions.”

“What questions do you want me to ask?” I asked apprehensively.

“I want you to introduce the name of Mrs. Ferrars.”

“Yes?”

“Speak of her in a natural fashion. Ask him if he was down here when
her husband died. You understand the kind of thing I mean. And while he
replies, watch his face without seeming to watch it. _C’est compris?_”

There was no time for more, for at that minute, as Poirot had
prophesied, Blunt left the others in his abrupt fashion and came over
to us.

I suggested strolling on the terrace, and he acquiesced. Poirot stayed
behind.

I stopped to examine a late rose.

“How things change in the course of a day or so,” I observed. “I was
up here last Wednesday, I remember, walking up and down this same
terrace. Ackroyd was with me—full of spirits. And now—three days
later—Ackroyd’s dead, poor fellow, Mrs. Ferrars’s dead—you knew her,
didn’t you? But of course you did.”

Blunt nodded his head.

“Had you seen her since you’d been down this time?”

“Went with Ackroyd to call. Last Tuesday, think it was. Fascinating
woman—but something queer about her. Deep—one would never know what she
was up to.”

I looked into his steady gray eyes. Nothing there surely. I went on:—

“I suppose you’d met her before.”

“Last time I was here—she and her husband had just come here to live.”
He paused a minute and then added: “Rum thing, she had changed a lot
between then and now.”

“How—changed?” I asked.

“Looked ten years older.”

“Were you down here when her husband died?” I asked, trying to make the
question sound as casual as possible.

“No. From all I heard it would be a good riddance. Uncharitable,
perhaps, but the truth.”

I agreed.

“Ashley Ferrars was by no means a pattern husband,” I said cautiously.

“Blackguard, I thought,” said Blunt.

“No,” I said, “only a man with more money than was good for him.”

“Oh! money! All the troubles in the world can be put down to money—or
the lack of it.”

“Which has been your particular trouble?” I asked.

“I’ve enough for what I want. I’m one of the lucky ones.”

“Indeed.”

“I’m not too flush just now, as a matter of fact. Came into a legacy a
year ago, and like a fool let myself be persuaded into putting it into
some wild-cat scheme.”

I sympathized, and narrated my own similar trouble.

Then the gong pealed out, and we all went in to lunch. Poirot drew me
back a little.

“_Eh! bien?_”

“He’s all right,” I said. “I’m sure of it.”

“Nothing—disturbing?”

“He had a legacy just a year ago,” I said. “But why not? Why shouldn’t
he? I’ll swear the man is perfectly square and aboveboard.”

“Without doubt, without doubt,” said Poirot soothingly. “Do not upset
yourself.”

He spoke as though to a fractious child.

We all trooped into the dining-room. It seemed incredible that less
than twenty-four hours had passed since I last sat at that table.

Afterwards, Mrs. Ackroyd took me aside and sat down with me on a sofa.

“I can’t help feeling a little hurt,” she murmured, producing a
handkerchief of the kind obviously not meant to be cried into. “Hurt,
I mean, by Roger’s lack of confidence in me. That twenty thousand
pounds ought to have been left to _me_—not to Flora. A mother could be
trusted to safeguard the interests of her child. A lack of trust, I
call it.”

“You forget, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said, “Flora was Ackroyd’s own niece, a
blood relation. It would have been different had you been his sister
instead of his sister-in-law.”

“As poor Cecil’s widow, I think my feelings ought to have been
considered,” said the lady, touching her eye-lashes gingerly with
the handkerchief. “But Roger was always most peculiar—not to say
_mean_—about money matters. It has been a most difficult position
for both Flora and myself. He did not even give the poor child an
allowance. He would pay her bills, you know, and even that with a good
deal of reluctance and asking what she wanted all those fal-lals for—so
like a man—but—now I’ve forgotten what it was I was going to say!
Oh, yes, not a penny we could call our own, you know. Flora resented
it—yes, I must say she resented it—very strongly. Though devoted to
her uncle, of course. But any girl would have resented it. Yes, I must
say Roger had very strange ideas about money. He wouldn’t even buy new
face towels, though I told him the old ones were in holes. And then,”
proceeded Mrs. Ackroyd, with a sudden leap highly characteristic of
her conversation, “to leave all that money—a thousand pounds—fancy, a
thousand pounds!—to that woman.”

“What woman?”

“That Russell woman. Something very queer about her, and so I’ve always
said. But Roger wouldn’t hear a word against her. Said she was a woman
of great force of character, and that he admired and respected her.
He was always going on about her rectitude and independence and moral
worth. _I_ think there’s something fishy about her. She was certainly
doing her best to marry Roger. But I soon put a stop to that. She’s
always hated me. Naturally. _I_ saw through her.”

I began to wonder if there was any chance of stemming Mrs. Ackroyd’s
eloquence, and getting away.

Mr. Hammond provided the necessary diversion by coming up to say
good-by. I seized my chance and rose also.

“About the inquest,” I said. “Where would you prefer it to be held.
Here, or at the Three Boars?”

Mrs. Ackroyd stared at me with a dropped jaw.

“The inquest?” she asked, the picture of consternation. “But surely
there won’t have to be an inquest?”

Mr. Hammond gave a dry little cough and murmured, “Inevitable. Under
the circumstances,” in two short little barks.

“But surely Dr. Sheppard can arrange——”

“There are limits to my powers of arrangement,” I said dryly.

“If his death was an accident——”

“He was murdered, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said brutally.

She gave a little cry.

“No theory of accident will hold water for a minute.”

Mrs. Ackroyd looked at me in distress. I had no patience with what I
thought was her silly fear of unpleasantness.

“If there’s an inquest, I—I shan’t have to answer questions and all
that, shall I?” she asked.

“I don’t know what will be necessary,” I answered. “I imagine
Mr. Raymond will take the brunt of it off you. He knows all the
circumstances, and can give formal evidence of identification.”

The lawyer assented with a little bow.

“I really don’t think there is anything to dread, Mrs. Ackroyd,” he
said. “You will be spared all unpleasantness. Now, as to the question
of money, have you all you need for the present? I mean,” he added, as
she looked at him inquiringly, “ready money. Cash, you know. If not, I
can arrange to let you have whatever you require.”

“That ought to be all right,” said Raymond, who was standing by. “Mr.
Ackroyd cashed a cheque for a hundred pounds yesterday.”

“A hundred pounds?”

“Yes. For wages and other expenses due to-day. At the moment it is
still intact.”

“Where is this money? In his desk?”

“No, he always kept his cash in his bedroom. In an old collar-box, to
be accurate. Funny idea, wasn’t it?”

“I think,” said the lawyer, “we ought to make sure the money is there
before I leave.”

“Certainly,” agreed the secretary. “I’ll take you up now.... Oh! I
forgot. The door’s locked.”

Inquiry from Parker elicited the information that Inspector Raglan was
in the housekeeper’s room asking a few supplementary questions. A few
minutes later the inspector joined the party in the hall, bringing the
key with him. He unlocked the door and we passed into the lobby and up
the small staircase. At the top of the stairs the door into Ackroyd’s
bedroom stood open. Inside the room it was dark, the curtains were
drawn, and the bed was turned down just as it had been last night. The
inspector drew the curtains, letting in the sunlight, and Geoffrey
Raymond went to the top drawer of a rosewood bureau.

“He kept his money like that, in an unlocked drawer. Just fancy,”
commented the inspector.

The secretary flushed a little.

“Mr. Ackroyd had perfect faith in the honesty of all the servants,” he
said hotly.

“Oh! quite so,” said the inspector hastily.

Raymond opened the drawer, took out a round leather collar-box from the
back of it, and opening it, drew out a thick wallet.

“Here is the money,” he said, taking out a fat roll of notes. “You
will find the hundred intact, I know, for Mr. Ackroyd put it in the
collar-box in my presence last night when he was dressing for dinner,
and of course it has not been touched since.”

Mr. Hammond took the roll from him and counted it. He looked up sharply.

“A hundred pounds, you said. But there is only sixty here.”

Raymond stared at him.

“Impossible,” he cried, springing forward. Taking the notes from the
other’s hand, he counted them aloud.

Mr. Hammond had been right. The total amounted to sixty pounds.

“But—I can’t understand it,” cried the secretary, bewildered.

Poirot asked a question.

“You saw Mr. Ackroyd put this money away last night when he was
dressing for dinner? You are sure he had not paid away any of it
already?”

“I’m sure he hadn’t. He even said, ‘I don’t want to take a hundred
pounds down to dinner with me. Too bulgy.’”

“Then the affair is very simple,” remarked Poirot. “Either he paid out
that forty pounds sometime last evening, or else it has been stolen.”

“That’s the matter in a nutshell,” agreed the inspector. He turned
to Mrs. Ackroyd. “Which of the servants would come in here yesterday
evening?”

“I suppose the housemaid would turn down the bed.”

“Who is she? What do you know about her?”

“She’s not been here very long,” said Mrs. Ackroyd. “But she’s a nice
ordinary country girl.”

“I think we ought to clear this matter up,” said the inspector. “If
Mr. Ackroyd paid that money away himself, it may have a bearing on the
mystery of the crime. The other servants all right, as far as you know?”

“Oh, I think so.”

“Not missed anything before?”

“No.”

“None of them leaving, or anything like that?”

“The parlormaid is leaving.”

“When?”

“She gave notice yesterday, I believe.”

“To you?”

“Oh, no. _I_ have nothing to do with the servants. Miss Russell attends
to the household matters.”

The inspector remained lost in thought for a minute or two. Then he
nodded his head and remarked, “I think I’d better have a word with Miss
Russell, and I’ll see the girl Dale as well.”

Poirot and I accompanied him to the housekeeper’s room. Miss Russell
received us with her usual sang-froid.

Elsie Dale had been at Fernly five months. A nice girl, quick at her
duties, and most respectable. Good references. The last girl in the
world to take anything not belonging to her.

What about the parlormaid?

“She, too, was a most superior girl. Very quiet and ladylike. An
excellent worker.”

“Then why is she leaving?” asked the inspector.

Miss Russell pursed up her lips.

“It was none of my doing. I understand Mr. Ackroyd found fault with
her yesterday afternoon. It was her duty to do the study, and she
disarranged some of the papers on his desk, I believe. He was very
annoyed about it, and she gave notice. At least, that is what I
understood from her, but perhaps you’d like to see her yourselves?”

The inspector assented. I had already noticed the girl when she was
waiting on us at lunch. A tall girl, with a lot of brown hair rolled
tightly away at the back of her neck, and very steady gray eyes. She
came in answer to the housekeeper’s summons, and stood very straight
with those same gray eyes fixed on us.

“You are Ursula Bourne?” asked the inspector.

“Yes, sir.”

“I understand you are leaving?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Why is that?”

“I disarranged some papers on Mr. Ackroyd’s desk. He was very angry
about it, and I said I had better leave. He told me to go as soon as
possible.”

“Were you in Mr. Ackroyd’s bedroom at all last night? Tidying up or
anything?”

“No, sir. That is Elsie’s work. I never went near that part of the
house.”

“I must tell you, my girl, that a large sum of money is missing from
Mr. Ackroyd’s room.”

At last I saw her roused. A wave of color swept over her face.

“I know nothing about any money. If you think I took it, and that that
is why Mr. Ackroyd dismissed me, you are wrong.”

“I’m not accusing you of taking it, my girl,” said the inspector.
“Don’t flare up so.”

The girl looked at him coldly.

“You can search my things if you like,” she said disdainfully. “But you
won’t find anything.”

Poirot suddenly interposed.

“It was yesterday afternoon that Mr. Ackroyd dismissed you—or you
dismissed yourself, was it not?” he asked.

The girl nodded.

“How long did the interview last?”

“The interview?”

“Yes, the interview between you and Mr. Ackroyd in the study?”

“I—I don’t know.”

“Twenty minutes? Half an hour?”

“Something like that.”

“Not longer?”

“Not longer than half an hour, certainly.”

“Thank you, mademoiselle.”

I looked curiously at him. He was rearranging a few objects on the
table, setting them straight with precise fingers. His eyes were
shining.

“That’ll do,” said the inspector.

Ursula Bourne disappeared. The inspector turned to Miss Russell.

“How long has she been here? Have you got a copy of the reference you
had with her?”

Without answering the first question, Miss Russell moved to an adjacent
bureau, opened one of the drawers, and took out a handful of letters
clipped together with a patent fastener. She selected one and handed it
to the inspector.

“H’m,” said he. “Reads all right. Mrs. Richard Folliott, Marby Grange,
Marby. Who’s this woman?”

“Quite good county people,” said Miss Russell.

“Well,” said the inspector, handing it back, “let’s have a look at the
other one, Elsie Dale.”

Elsie Dale was a big fair girl, with a pleasant but slightly stupid
face. She answered our questions readily enough, and showed much
distress and concern at the loss of the money.

“I don’t think there’s anything wrong with her,” observed the
inspector, after he had dismissed her.

“What about Parker?”

Miss Russell pursed her lips together and made no reply.

“I’ve a feeling there’s something wrong about that man,” the inspector
continued thoughtfully. “The trouble is that I don’t quite see when he
got his opportunity. He’d be busy with his duties immediately after
dinner, and he’s got a pretty good alibi all through the evening. I
know, for I’ve been devoting particular attention to it. Well, thank
you very much, Miss Russell. We’ll leave things as they are for the
present. It’s highly probable Mr. Ackroyd paid that money away himself.”

The housekeeper bade us a dry good-afternoon, and we took our leave.

I left the house with Poirot.

“I wonder,” I said, breaking the silence, “what the papers the girl
disarranged could have been for Ackroyd to have got into such a state
about them? I wonder if there is any clew there to the mystery.”

“The secretary said there were no papers of particular importance on
the desk,” said Poirot quietly.

“Yes, but——” I paused.

“It strikes you as odd that Ackroyd should have flown into a rage about
so trivial a matter?”

“Yes, it does rather.”

“But was it a trivial matter?”

“Of course,” I admitted, “we don’t know what those papers may have
been. But Raymond certainly said——”

“Leave M. Raymond out of it for a minute. What did you think of that
girl?”

“Which girl? The parlormaid?”

“Yes, the parlormaid. Ursula Bourne.”

“She seemed a nice girl,” I said hesitatingly.

Poirot repeated my words, but whereas I had laid a slight stress on the
fourth word, he put it on the second.

“She _seemed_ a nice girl—yes.”

Then, after a minute’s silence, he took something from his pocket and
handed it to me.

“See, my friend, I will show you something. Look there.”

The paper he had handed me was that compiled by the inspector and given
by him to Poirot that morning. Following the pointing finger, I saw a
small cross marked in pencil opposite the name Ursula Bourne.

“You may not have noticed it at the time, my good friend, but there was
one person on this list whose alibi had no kind of confirmation. Ursula
Bourne.”

“You don’t think——”

“Dr. Sheppard, I dare to think anything. Ursula Bourne may have killed
Mr. Ackroyd, but I confess I can see no motive for her doing so. Can
you?”

He looked at me very hard—so hard that I felt uncomfortable.

“Can you?” he repeated.

“No motive whatsoever,” I said firmly.

His gaze relaxed. He frowned and murmured to himself:—

“Since the blackmailer was a man, it follows that she cannot be the
blackmailer, then——”

I coughed.

“As far as that goes——” I began doubtfully.

He spun round on me.

“What? What are you going to say?”

“Nothing. Nothing. Only that, strictly speaking, Mrs. Ferrars in her
letter mentioned a _person_—she didn’t actually specify a man. But we
took it for granted, Ackroyd and I, that it _was_ a man.”

Poirot did not seem to be listening to me. He was muttering to himself
again.

“But then it is possible after all—yes, certainly it is possible—but
then—ah! I must rearrange my ideas. Method, order; never have I needed
them more. Everything must fit in—in its appointed place—otherwise I am
on the wrong tack.”

He broke off, and whirled round upon me again.

“Where is Marby?”

“It’s on the other side of Cranchester.”

“How far away?”

“Oh!—fourteen miles, perhaps.”

“Would it be possible for you to go there? To-morrow, say?”

“To-morrow? Let me see, that’s Sunday. Yes, I could arrange it. What do
you want me to do there?”

“See this Mrs. Folliott. Find out all you can about Ursula Bourne.”

“Very well. But—I don’t much care for the job.”

“It is not the time to make difficulties. A man’s life may hang on
this.”

“Poor Ralph,” I said with a sigh. “You believe him to be innocent,
though?”

Poirot looked at me very gravely.

“Do you want to know the truth?”

“Of course.”

“Then you shall have it. My friend, everything points to the assumption
that he is guilty.”

“What!” I exclaimed.

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, that stupid inspector—for he is stupid—has everything pointing
his way. I seek for the truth—and the truth leads me every time to
Ralph Paton. Motive, opportunity, means. But I will leave no stone
unturned. I promised Mademoiselle Flora. And she was very sure, that
little one. But very sure indeed.”




                              CHAPTER XI

                          POIROT PAYS A CALL


I was slightly nervous when I rang the bell at Marby Grange the
following afternoon. I wondered very much what Poirot expected to
find out. He had entrusted the job to me. Why? Was it because, as
in the case of questioning Major Blunt, he wished to remain in the
background? The wish, intelligible in the first case, seemed to me
quite meaningless here.

My meditations were interrupted by the advent of a smart parlormaid.

Yes, Mrs. Folliott was at home. I was ushered into a big drawing-room,
and looked round me curiously as I waited for the mistress of the
house. A large bare room, some good bits of old china, and some
beautiful etchings, shabby covers and curtains. A lady’s room in every
sense of the term.

I turned from the inspection of a Bartolozzi on the wall as Mrs.
Folliott came into the room. She was a tall woman, with untidy brown
hair, and a very winning smile.

“Dr. Sheppard,” she said hesitatingly.

“That is my name,” I replied. “I must apologize for calling upon you
like this, but I wanted some information about a parlormaid previously
employed by you, Ursula Bourne.”

With the utterance of the name the smile vanished from her face, and
all the cordiality froze out of her manner. She looked uncomfortable
and ill at ease.

“Ursula Bourne?” she said hesitatingly.

“Yes,” I said. “Perhaps you don’t remember the name?”

“Oh, yes, of course. I—I remember perfectly.”

“She left you just over a year ago, I understand?”

“Yes. Yes, she did. That is quite right.”

“And you were satisfied with her whilst she was with you? How long was
she with you, by the way?”

“Oh! a year or two—I can’t remember exactly how long. She—she is very
capable. I’m sure you will find her quite satisfactory. I didn’t know
she was leaving Fernly. I hadn’t the least idea of it.”

“Can you tell me anything about her?” I asked.

“Anything about her?”

“Yes, where she comes from, who her people are—that sort of thing?”

Mrs. Folliott’s face wore more than ever its frozen look.

“I don’t know at all.”

“Who was she with before she came to you?”

“I’m afraid I don’t remember.”

There was a spark of anger now underlying her nervousness. She flung up
her head in a gesture that was vaguely familiar.

“Is it really necessary to ask all these questions?”

“Not at all,” I said, with an air of surprise and a tinge of apology
in my manner. “I had no idea you would mind answering them. I am very
sorry.”

Her anger left her and she became confused again.

“Oh! I don’t mind answering them. I assure you I don’t. Why should I?
It—it just seemed a little odd, you know. That’s all. A little odd.”

One advantage of being a medical practitioner is that you can usually
tell when people are lying to you. I should have known from Mrs.
Folliott’s manner, if from nothing else, that she did mind answering my
questions—minded intensely. She was thoroughly uncomfortable and upset,
and there was plainly some mystery in the background. I judged her to
be a woman quite unused to deception of any kind, and consequently
rendered acutely uneasy when forced to practice it. A child could have
seen through her.

But it was also clear that she had no intention of telling me anything
further. Whatever the mystery centering around Ursula Bourne might be,
I was not going to learn it through Mrs. Folliott.

Defeated, I apologized once more for disturbing her, took my hat and
departed.

I went to see a couple of patients and arrived home about six o’clock.
Caroline was sitting beside the wreck of tea things. She had that
look of suppressed exultation on her face which I know only too well.
It is a sure sign with her, of either the getting or the giving of
information. I wondered which it had been.

“I’ve had a very interesting afternoon,” began Caroline as I dropped
into my own particular easy chair, and stretched out my feet to the
inviting blaze in the fireplace.

“Have you?” I asked. “Miss Ganett drop in to tea?”

Miss Ganett is one of the chief of our newsmongers.

“Guess again,” said Caroline with intense complacency.

I guessed several times, working slowly through all the members of
Caroline’s Intelligence Corps. My sister received each guess with
a triumphant shake of the head. In the end she volunteered the
information herself.

“M. Poirot!” she said. “Now what do you think of that?”

I thought a good many things of it, but I was careful not to say them
to Caroline.

“Why did he come?” I asked.

“To see me, of course. He said that knowing my brother so well, he
hoped he might be permitted to make the acquaintance of his charming
sister—your charming sister, I’ve got mixed up, but you know what I
mean.”

“What did he talk about?” I asked.

“He told me a lot about himself and his cases. You know that Prince
Paul of Mauretania—the one who’s just married a dancer?”

“Yes?”

“I saw a most intriguing paragraph about her in Society Snippets the
other day, hinting that she was really a Russian Grand Duchess—one
of the Czar’s daughters who managed to escape from the Bolsheviks.
Well, it seems that M. Poirot solved a baffling murder mystery that
threatened to involve them both. Prince Paul was beside himself with
gratitude.”

“Did he give him an emerald tie pin the size of a plover’s egg?” I
inquired sarcastically.

“He didn’t mention it. Why?”

“Nothing,” I said. “I thought it was always done. It is in detective
fiction anyway. The super detective always has his rooms littered with
rubies and pearls and emeralds from grateful Royal clients.”

“It’s very interesting to hear about these things from the inside,”
said my sister complacently.

It would be—to Caroline. I could not but admire the ingenuity of M.
Hercule Poirot, who had selected unerringly the case of all others that
would most appeal to an elderly maiden lady living in a small village.

“Did he tell you if the dancer was really a Grand Duchess?” I inquired.

“He was not at liberty to speak,” said Caroline importantly.

I wondered how far Poirot had strained the truth in talking to
Caroline—probably not at all. He had conveyed his innuendoes by means
of his eyebrows and his shoulders.

“And after all this,” I remarked, “I suppose you were ready to eat out
of his hand.”

“Don’t be coarse, James. I don’t know where you get these vulgar
expressions from.”

“Probably from my only link with the outside world—my patients.
Unfortunately my practice does not lie amongst Royal princes and
interesting Russian émigrés.”

Caroline pushed her spectacles up and looked at me.

“You seem very grumpy, James. It must be your liver. A blue pill, I
think, to-night.”

To see me in my own home, you would never imagine that I was a doctor
of medicine. Caroline does the home prescribing both for herself and me.

“Damn my liver,” I said irritably. “Did you talk about the murder at
all?”

“Well, naturally, James. What else is there to talk about locally?
I was able to set M. Poirot right upon several points. He was very
grateful to me. He said I had the makings of a born detective in me—and
a wonderful psychological insight into human nature.”

Caroline was exactly like a cat that is full to overflowing with rich
cream. She was positively purring.

“He talked a lot about the little gray cells of the brain, and of their
functions. His own, he says, are of the first quality.”

“He would say so,” I remarked bitterly. “Modesty is certainly not his
middle name.”

“I wish you would not be so horribly American, James. He thought it
very important that Ralph should be found as soon as possible, and
induced to come forward and give an account of himself. He says that
his disappearance will produce a very unfortunate impression at the
inquest.”

“And what did you say to that?”

“I agreed with him,” said Caroline importantly. “And I was able to tell
him the way people were already talking about it.”

“Caroline,” I said sharply, “did you tell M. Poirot what you overheard
in the wood that day?”

“I did,” said Caroline complacently.

I got up and began to walk about.

“You realize what you’re doing, I hope,” I jerked out. “You’re putting
a halter round Ralph Paton’s neck as surely as you’re sitting in that
chair.”

“Not at all,” said Caroline, quite unruffled. “I was surprised _you_
hadn’t told him.”

“I took very good care not to,” I said. “I’m fond of that boy.”

“So am I. That’s why I say you’re talking nonsense. I don’t believe
Ralph did it, and so the truth can’t hurt him, and we ought to give M.
Poirot all the help we can. Why, think, very likely Ralph was out with
that identical girl on the night of the murder, and if so, he’s got a
perfect alibi.”

“If he’s got a perfect alibi,” I retorted, “why doesn’t he come forward
and say so?”

“Might get the girl into trouble,” said Caroline sapiently. “But if M.
Poirot gets hold of her, and puts it to her as her duty, she’ll come
forward of her own accord and clear Ralph.”

“You seem to have invented a romantic fairy story of your own,” I said.
“You read too many trashy novels, Caroline. I’ve always told you so.”

I dropped into my chair again.

“Did Poirot ask you any more questions?” I inquired.

“Only about the patients you had that morning.”

“The patients?” I demanded, unbelievingly.

“Yes, your surgery patients. How many and who they were?”

“Do you mean to say you were able to tell him that?” I demanded.

Caroline is really amazing.

“Why not?” asked my sister triumphantly. “I can see the path up to the
surgery door perfectly from this window. And I’ve got an excellent
memory, James. Much better than yours, let me tell you.”

“I’m sure you have,” I murmured mechanically.

My sister went on, checking the names on her fingers.

“There was old Mrs. Bennett, and that boy from the farm with the bad
finger, Dolly Grice to have a needle out of her finger; that American
steward off the liner. Let me see—that’s four. Yes, and old George
Evans with his ulcer. And lastly——”

She paused significantly.

“Well?”

Caroline brought out her climax triumphantly. She hissed in the most
approved style—aided by the fortunate number of s’s at her disposal.

“_Miss Russell!_”

She sat back in her chair and looked at me meaningly, and when Caroline
looks at you meaningly, it is impossible to miss it.

“I don’t know what you mean,” I said, quite untruthfully. “Why
shouldn’t Miss Russell consult me about her bad knee?”

“Bad knee,” said Caroline. “Fiddlesticks! No more bad knee than you and
I. She was after something else.”

“What?” I asked.

Caroline had to admit that she didn’t know.

“But depend upon it, that was what he was trying to get at, M. Poirot,
I mean. There’s something fishy about that woman, and he knows it.”

“Precisely the remark Mrs. Ackroyd made to me yesterday,” I said. “That
there was something fishy about Miss Russell.”

“Ah!” said Caroline darkly, “Mrs. Ackroyd! There’s another!”

“Another what?”

Caroline refused to explain her remarks. She merely nodded her head
several times, rolled up her knitting, and went upstairs to don the
high mauve silk blouse and the gold locket which she calls dressing for
dinner.

I stayed there staring into the fire and thinking over Caroline’s
words. Had Poirot really come to gain information about Miss Russell,
or was it only Caroline’s tortuous mind that interpreted everything
according to her own ideas?

There had certainly been nothing in Miss Russell’s manner that morning
to arouse suspicion. At least——

I remembered her persistent conversation on the subject of drug-taking
and from that she had led the conversation to poisons and poisoning.
But there was nothing in that. Ackroyd had not been poisoned. Still, it
was odd....

I heard Caroline’s voice, rather acid in note, calling from the top of
the stairs.

“James, you will be late for dinner.”

I put some coal on the fire and went upstairs obediently.

It is well at any price to have peace in the home.




                              CHAPTER XII

                            ROUND THE TABLE


A joint inquest was held on Monday.

I do not propose to give the proceedings in detail. To do so would only
be to go over the same ground again and again. By arrangement with the
police, very little was allowed to come out. I gave evidence as to the
cause of Ackroyd’s death and the probable time. The absence of Ralph
Paton was commented on by the coroner, but not unduly stressed.

Afterwards, Poirot and I had a few words with Inspector Raglan. The
inspector was very grave.

“It looks bad, Mr. Poirot,” he said. “I’m trying to judge the thing
fair and square. I’m a local man, and I’ve seen Captain Paton many
times in Cranchester. I’m not wanting him to be the guilty one—but it’s
bad whichever way you look at it. If he’s innocent, why doesn’t he come
forward? We’ve got evidence against him, but it’s just possible that
that evidence could be explained away. Then why doesn’t he give an
explanation?”

A lot more lay behind the inspector’s words than I knew at the time.
Ralph’s description had been wired to every port and railway station
in England. The police everywhere were on the alert. His rooms in town
were watched, and any houses he had been known to be in the habit
of frequenting. With such a _cordon_ it seemed impossible that Ralph
should be able to evade detection. He had no luggage, and, as far as
any one knew, no money.

“I can’t find any one who saw him at the station that night,” continued
the inspector. “And yet he’s well known down here, and you’d think
somebody would have noticed him. There’s no news from Liverpool either.”

“You think he went to Liverpool?” queried Poirot.

“Well, it’s on the cards. That telephone message from the station,
just three minutes before the Liverpool express left—there ought to be
something in that.”

“Unless it was deliberately intended to throw you off the scent. That
might just possibly be the point of the telephone message.”

“That’s an idea,” said the inspector eagerly. “Do you really think
that’s the explanation of the telephone call?”

“My friend,” said Poirot gravely, “I do not know. But I will tell you
this: I believe that when we find the explanation of that telephone
call we shall find the explanation of the murder.”

“You said something like that before, I remember,” I observed, looking
at him curiously.

Poirot nodded.

“I always come back to it,” he said seriously.

“It seems to me utterly irrelevant,” I declared.

“I wouldn’t say that,” demurred the inspector. “But I must confess I
think Mr. Poirot here harps on it a little too much. We’ve better clews
than that. The fingerprints on the dagger, for instance.”

Poirot became suddenly very foreign in manner, as he often did when
excited over anything.

“M. l’Inspecteur,” he said, “beware of the blind—the blind—_comment
dire?_—the little street that has no end to it.”

Inspector Raglan stared, but I was quicker.

“You mean a blind alley?” I said.

“That is it—the blind street that leads nowhere. So it may be with
those fingerprints—they may lead you nowhere.”

“I don’t see how that can well be,” said the police officer. “I suppose
you’re hinting that they’re faked? I’ve read of such things being done,
though I can’t say I’ve ever come across it in my experience. But fake
or true—they’re bound to lead _somewhere_.”

Poirot merely shrugged his shoulders, flinging out his arms wide.

The inspector then showed us various enlarged photographs of the
fingerprints, and proceeded to become technical on the subject of loops
and whorls.

“Come now,” he said at last, annoyed by Poirot’s detached manner,
“you’ve got to admit that those prints were made by some one who was in
the house that night?”

“_Bien entendu_,” said Poirot, nodding his head.

“Well, I’ve taken the prints of every member of the household, every
one, mind you, from the old lady down to the kitchenmaid.”

I don’t think Mrs. Ackroyd would enjoy being referred to as the old
lady. She must spend a considerable amount on cosmetics.

“Every one’s,” repeated the inspector fussily.

“Including mine,” I said dryly.

“Very well. None of them correspond. That leaves us two alternatives.
Ralph Paton, or the mysterious stranger the doctor here tells us about.
When we get hold of those two——”

“Much valuable time may have been lost,” broke in Poirot.

“I don’t quite get you, Mr. Poirot?”

“You have taken the prints of every one in the house, you say,”
murmured Poirot. “Is that the exact truth you are telling me there, M.
l’Inspecteur?”

“Certainly.”

“Without overlooking any one?”

“Without overlooking any one.”

“The quick or the dead?”

For a moment the inspector looked bewildered at what he took to be a
religious observation. Then he reacted slowly.

“You mean——”

“The dead, M. l’Inspecteur.”

The inspector still took a minute or two to understand.

“I am suggesting,” said Poirot placidly, “that the fingerprints on the
dagger handle are those of Mr. Ackroyd himself. It is an easy matter to
verify. His body is still available.”

“But why? What would be the point of it? You’re surely not suggesting
suicide, Mr. Poirot?”

“Ah! no. My theory is that the murderer wore gloves or wrapped
something round his hand. After the blow was struck, he picked up the
victim’s hand and closed it round the dagger handle.”

“But why?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders again.

“To make a confusing case even more confusing.”

“Well,” said the inspector, “I’ll look into it. What gave you the idea
in the first place?”

“When you were so kind as to show me the dagger and draw attention to
the fingerprints. I know very little of loops and whorls—see, I confess
my ignorance frankly. But it did occur to me that the position of the
prints was somewhat awkward. Not so would I have held a dagger in order
to strike. Naturally, with the right hand brought up over the shoulder
backwards, it would have been difficult to put it in exactly the right
position.”

Inspector Raglan stared at the little man. Poirot, with an air of great
unconcern, flecked a speck of dust from his coat sleeve.

“Well,” said the inspector, “it’s an idea. I’ll look into it all right,
but don’t you be disappointed if nothing comes of it.”

He endeavored to make his tone kindly and patronizing. Poirot watched
him go off. Then he turned to me with twinkling eyes.

“Another time,” he observed, “I must be more careful of his _amour
propre_. And now that we are left to our own devices, what do you
think, my good friend, of a little reunion of the family?”

The “little reunion,” as Poirot called it, took place about half an
hour later. We sat round the table in the dining-room at Fernly—Poirot
at the head of the table, like the chairman of some ghastly board
meeting. The servants were not present, so we were six in all. Mrs.
Ackroyd, Flora, Major Blunt, young Raymond, Poirot, and myself.

When every one was assembled, Poirot rose and bowed.

“Messieurs, mesdames, I have called you together for a certain
purpose.” He paused. “To begin with, I want to make a very special plea
to mademoiselle.”

“To me?” said Flora.

“Mademoiselle, you are engaged to Captain Ralph Paton. If any one
is in his confidence, you are. I beg you, most earnestly, if you
know of his whereabouts, to persuade him to come forward. One little
minute”—as Flora raised her head to speak—“say nothing till you have
well reflected. Mademoiselle, his position grows daily more dangerous.
If he had come forward at once, no matter how damning the facts, he
might have had a chance of explaining them away. But this silence—this
flight—what can it mean? Surely only one thing, knowledge of guilt.
Mademoiselle, if you really believe in his innocence, persuade him to
come forward before it is too late.”

Flora’s face had gone very white.

“Too late!” she repeated, very low.

Poirot leant forward, looking at her.

“See now, mademoiselle,” he said very gently, “it is Papa Poirot who
asks you this. The old Papa Poirot who has much knowledge and much
experience. I would not seek to entrap you, mademoiselle. Will you not
trust me—and tell me where Ralph Paton is hiding?”

The girl rose, and stood facing him.

“M. Poirot,” she said in a clear voice, “I swear to you—swear
solemnly—that I have no idea where Ralph is, and that I have neither
seen him nor heard from him either on the day of—of the murder, or
since.”

She sat down again. Poirot gazed at her in silence for a minute or two,
then he brought his hand down on the table with a sharp rap.

“_Bien!_ That is that,” he said. His face hardened. “Now I appeal to
these others who sit round this table, Mrs. Ackroyd, Major Blunt, Dr.
Sheppard, Mr. Raymond. You are all friends and intimates of the missing
man. If you know where Ralph Paton is hiding, speak out.”

There was a long silence. Poirot looked to each in turn.

“I beg of you,” he said in a low voice, “speak out.”

But still there was silence, broken at last by Mrs. Ackroyd.

“I must say,” she observed in a plaintive voice, “that Ralph’s absence
is most peculiar—most peculiar indeed. Not to come forward at such a
time. It looks, you know, as though there were something _behind_ it.
I can’t help thinking, Flora dear, that it was a very fortunate thing
your engagement was never formally announced.”

“Mother!” cried Flora angrily.

“Providence,” declared Mrs. Ackroyd. “I have a devout belief in
Providence—a divinity that shapes our ends, as Shakespeare’s beautiful
line runs.”

“Surely you don’t make the Almighty directly responsible for
thick ankles, Mrs. Ackroyd, do you?” asked Geoffrey Raymond, his
irresponsible laugh ringing out.

His idea was, I think, to loosen the tension, but Mrs. Ackroyd threw
him a glance of reproach and took out her handkerchief.

“Flora has been saved a terrible amount of notoriety and
unpleasantness. Not for a moment that I think dear Ralph had anything
to do with poor Roger’s death. I _don’t_ think so. But then I have a
trusting heart—I always have had, ever since a child. I am loath to
believe the worst of any one. But, of course, one must remember that
Ralph was in several air raids as a young boy. The results are apparent
long after, sometimes, they say. People are not responsible for their
actions in the least. They lose control, you know, without being able
to help it.”

“Mother,” cried Flora, “you don’t think Ralph did it?”

“Come, Mrs. Ackroyd,” said Blunt.

“I don’t know what to think,” said Mrs. Ackroyd tearfully. “It’s all
very upsetting. What would happen to the estate, I wonder, if Ralph
were found guilty?”

Raymond pushed his chair away from the table violently. Major Blunt
remained very quiet, looking thoughtfully at her. “Like shell-shock,
you know,” said Mrs. Ackroyd obstinately, “and I dare say Roger kept
him very short of money—with the best intentions, of course. I can see
you are all against me, but I do think it is very odd that Ralph has
not come forward, and I must say I am thankful Flora’s engagement was
never announced formally.”

“It will be to-morrow,” said Flora in a clear voice.

“Flora!” cried her mother, aghast.

Flora had turned to the secretary.

“Will you send the announcement to the _Morning Post_ and the _Times_,
please, Mr. Raymond.”

“If you are sure that it is wise, Miss Ackroyd,” he replied gravely.

She turned impulsively to Blunt.

“You understand,” she said. “What else can I do? As things are, I must
stand by Ralph. Don’t you see that I must?”

She looked very searchingly at him, and after a long pause he nodded
abruptly.

Mrs. Ackroyd burst out into shrill protests. Flora remained unmoved.
Then Raymond spoke.

“I appreciate your motives, Miss Ackroyd. But don’t you think you’re
being rather precipitate? Wait a day or two.”

“To-morrow,” said Flora, in a clear voice. “It’s no good, mother, going
on like this. Whatever else I am, I’m not disloyal to my friends.”

“M. Poirot,” Mrs. Ackroyd appealed tearfully, “can’t you say anything
at all?”

“Nothing to be said,” interpolated Blunt. “She’s doing the right thing.
I’ll stand by her through thick and thin.”

Flora held out her hand to him.

“Thank you, Major Blunt,” she said.

“Mademoiselle,” said Poirot, “will you let an old man congratulate you
on your courage and your loyalty? And will you not misunderstand me if
I ask you—ask you most solemnly—to postpone the announcement you speak
of for at least two days more?”

Flora hesitated.

“I ask it in Ralph Paton’s interests as much as in yours, mademoiselle.
You frown. You do not see how that can be. But I assure you that it
is so. _Pas de blagues_. You put the case into my hands—you must not
hamper me now.”

Flora paused a few minutes before replying.

“I do not like it,” she said at last, “but I will do what you say.”

She sat down again at the table.

“And now, messieurs et mesdames,” said Poirot rapidly, “I will continue
with what I was about to say. Understand this, I mean to arrive at
the truth. The truth, however ugly in itself, is always curious and
beautiful to the seeker after it. I am much aged, my powers may not
be what they were.” Here he clearly expected a contradiction. “In all
probability this is the last case I shall ever investigate. But Hercule
Poirot does not end with a failure. Messieurs et mesdames, I tell you,
I mean to _know_. And I shall know—in spite of you all.”

He brought out the last words provocatively, hurling them in our face
as it were. I think we all flinched back a little, excepting Geoffrey
Raymond, who remained good humored and imperturbable as usual.

“How do you mean—in spite of us all?” he asked, with slightly raised
eyebrows.

“But—just that, monsieur. Every one of you in this room is concealing
something from me.” He raised his hand as a faint murmur of protest
arose. “Yes, yes, I know what I am saying. It may be something
unimportant—trivial—which is supposed to have no bearing on the case,
but there it is. _Each one of you has something to hide._ Come, now, am
I right?”

His glance, challenging and accusing, swept round the table. And every
pair of eyes dropped before his. Yes, mine as well.

“I am answered,” said Poirot, with a curious laugh. He got up from his
seat. “I appeal to you all. Tell me the truth—the whole truth.” There
was a silence. “Will no one speak?”

He gave the same short laugh again.

“_C’est dommage_,” he said, and went out.




                             CHAPTER XIII

                            THE GOOSE QUILL


That evening, at Poirot’s request, I went over to his house after
dinner. Caroline saw me depart with visible reluctance. I think she
would have liked to have accompanied me.

Poirot greeted me hospitably. He had placed a bottle of Irish whisky
(which I detest) on a small table, with a soda water siphon and a
glass. He himself was engaged in brewing hot chocolate. It was a
favorite beverage of his, I discovered later.

He inquired politely after my sister, whom he declared to be a most
interesting woman.

“I’m afraid you’ve been giving her a swelled head,” I said dryly. “What
about Sunday afternoon?”

He laughed and twinkled.

“I always like to employ the expert,” he remarked obscurely, but he
refused to explain the remark.

“You got all the local gossip anyway,” I remarked. “True, and untrue.”

“And a great deal of valuable information,” he added quietly.

“Such as——?”

He shook his head.

“Why not have told me the truth?” he countered. “In a place like this,
all Ralph Paton’s doings were bound to be known. If your sister had not
happened to pass through the wood that day somebody else would have
done so.”

“I suppose they would,” I said grumpily. “What about this interest of
yours in my patients?”

Again he twinkled.

“Only one of them, doctor. Only one of them.”

“The last?” I hazarded.

“I find Miss Russell a study of the most interesting,” he said
evasively.

“Do you agree with my sister and Mrs. Ackroyd that there is something
fishy about her?” I asked.

“Eh? What do you say—fishy?”

I explained to the best of my ability.

“And they say that, do they?”

“Didn’t my sister convey as much to you yesterday afternoon?”

“_C’est possible._”

“For no reason whatever,” I declared.

“_Les femmes_,” generalized Poirot. “They are marvelous! They invent
haphazard—and by miracle they are right. Not that it is that, really.
Women observe subconsciously a thousand little details, without knowing
that they are doing so. Their subconscious mind adds these little
things together—and they call the result intuition. Me, I am very
skilled in psychology. I know these things.”

He swelled his chest out importantly, looking so ridiculous, that I
found it difficult not to burst out laughing. Then he took a small sip
of his chocolate, and carefully wiped his mustache.

“I wish you’d tell me,” I burst out, “what you really think of it all?”

He put down his cup.

“You wish that?”

“I do.”

“You have seen what I have seen. Should not our ideas be the same?”

“I’m afraid you’re laughing at me,” I said stiffly. “Of course, I’ve no
experience of matters of this kind.”

Poirot smiled at me indulgently.

“You are like the little child who wants to know the way the engine
works. You wish to see the affair, not as the family doctor sees it,
but with the eye of a detective who knows and cares for no one—to whom
they are all strangers and all equally liable to suspicion.”

“You put it very well,” I said.

“So I give you then, a little lecture. The first thing is to get a
clear history of what happened that evening—always bearing in mind that
the person who speaks may be lying.”

I raised my eyebrows.

“Rather a suspicious attitude.”

“But necessary—I assure you, necessary. Now first—Dr. Sheppard leaves
the house at ten minutes to nine. How do I know that?”

“Because I told you so.”

“But you might not be speaking the truth—or the watch you went by might
be wrong. But Parker also says that you left the house at ten minutes
to nine. So we accept that statement and pass on. At nine o’clock you
run into a man—and here we come to what we will call the Romance of the
Mysterious Stranger—just outside the Park gates. How do I know that
that is so?”

“I told you so,” I began again, but Poirot interrupted me with a
gesture of impatience.

“Ah! but it is that you are a little stupid to-night, my friend. _You_
know that it is so—but how am _I_ to know? _Eh bien_, I am able to
tell you that the Mysterious Stranger was not a hallucination on your
part, because the maid of a Miss Ganett met him a few minutes before
you did, and of her too he inquired the way to Fernly Park. We accept
his presence, therefore, and we can be fairly sure of two things about
him—that he was a stranger to the neighborhood, and that whatever his
object in going to Fernly, there was no great secrecy about it, since
he twice asked the way there.”

“Yes,” I said, “I see that.”

“Now I have made it my business to find out more about this man. He had
a drink at the Three Boars, I learn, and the barmaid there says that he
spoke with an American accent and mentioned having just come over from
the States. Did it strike you that he had an American accent?”

“Yes, I think he had,” I said, after a minute or two, during which I
cast my mind back; “but a very slight one.”

“_Précisément._ There is also this which, you will remember, I picked
up in the summer-house?”

He held out to me the little quill. I looked at it curiously. Then a
memory of something I had read stirred in me.

Poirot, who had been watching my face, nodded.

“Yes, heroin ‘snow.’ Drug-takers carry it like this, and sniff it up
the nose.”

“Diamorphine hydrochloride,” I murmured mechanically.

“This method of taking the drug is very common on the other side.
Another proof, if we wanted one, that the man came from Canada or the
States.”

“What first attracted your attention to that summer-house?” I asked
curiously.

“My friend the inspector took it for granted that any one using that
path did so as a short cut to the house, but as soon as I saw the
summer-house, I realized that the same path would be taken by any one
using the summer-house as a rendezvous. Now it seems fairly certain
that the stranger came neither to the front nor to the back door. Then
did some one from the house go out and meet him? If so, what could be a
more convenient place than that little summer-house? I searched it with
the hope that I might find some clew inside. I found two, the scrap of
cambric and the quill.”

“And the scrap of cambric?” I asked curiously. “What about that?”

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

“You do not use your little gray cells,” he remarked dryly. “The scrap
of starched cambric should be obvious.”

“Not very obvious to me.” I changed the subject. “Anyway,” I said,
“this man went to the summer-house to meet somebody. Who was that
somebody?”

“Exactly the question,” said Poirot. “You will remember that Mrs.
Ackroyd and her daughter came over from Canada to live here?”

“Is that what you meant to-day when you accused them of hiding the
truth?”

“Perhaps. Now another point. What did you think of the parlormaid’s
story?”

“What story?”

“The story of her dismissal. Does it take half an hour to dismiss a
servant? Was the story of those important papers a likely one? And
remember, though she says she was in her bedroom from nine-thirty until
ten o’clock, there is no one to confirm her statement.”

“You bewilder me,” I said.

“To me it grows clearer. But tell me now your own ideas and theories.”

I drew a piece of paper from my pocket.

“I just scribbled down a few suggestions,” I said apologetically.

“But excellent—you have method. Let us hear them.”

I read out in a somewhat embarrassed voice.

“To begin with, one must look at the thing logically——”

“Just what my poor Hastings used to say,” interrupted Poirot, “but
alas! he never did so.”

“_Point No. 1._—Mr. Ackroyd was heard talking to some one at half-past
nine.

“_Point No. 2._—At some time during the evening Ralph Paton must have
come in through the window, as evidenced by the prints of his shoes.

“_Point No. 3._—Mr. Ackroyd was nervous that evening, and would only
have admitted some one he knew.

“_Point No. 4._—The person with Mr. Ackroyd at nine-thirty was asking
for money. We know Ralph Paton was in a scrape.

“_These four points go to show that the person with Mr. Ackroyd at
nine-thirty was Ralph Paton. But we know that Mr. Ackroyd was alive at
a quarter to ten, therefore it was not Ralph who killed him. Ralph left
the window open. Afterwards the murderer came in that way._”

“And who was the murderer?” inquired Poirot.

“The American stranger. He may have been in league with Parker, and
possibly in Parker we have the man who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars. If
so, Parker may have heard enough to realize the game was up, have told
his accomplice so, and the latter did the crime with the dagger which
Parker gave him.”

“It is a theory that,” admitted Poirot. “Decidedly you have cells of a
kind. But it leaves a good deal unaccounted for.”

“Such as——?”

“The telephone call, the pushed-out chair——”

“Do you really think the latter important?” I interrupted.

“Perhaps not,” admitted my friend. “It may have been pulled out
by accident, and Raymond or Blunt may have shoved it into place
unconsciously under the stress of emotion. Then there is the missing
forty pounds.”

“Given by Ackroyd to Ralph,” I suggested. “He may have reconsidered his
first refusal.”

“That still leaves one thing unexplained?”

“What?”

“Why was Blunt so certain in his own mind that it was Raymond with Mr.
Ackroyd at nine-thirty?”

“He explained that,” I said.

“You think so? I will not press the point. Tell me instead, what were
Ralph Paton’s reasons for disappearing?”

“That’s rather more difficult,” I said slowly. “I shall have to speak
as a medical man. Ralph’s nerves must have gone phut! If he suddenly
found out that his uncle had been murdered within a few minutes of his
leaving him—after, perhaps, a rather stormy interview—well, he might
get the wind up and clear right out. Men have been known to do that—act
guiltily when they’re perfectly innocent.”

“Yes, that is true,” said Poirot. “But we must not lose sight of one
thing.”

“I know what you’re going to say,” I remarked: “motive. Ralph Paton
inherits a great fortune by his uncle’s death.”

“That is one motive,” agreed Poirot.

“One?”

“_Mais oui._ Do you realize that there are three separate motives
staring us in the face. Somebody certainly stole the blue envelope and
its contents. That is one motive. Blackmail! Ralph Paton may have been
the man who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars. Remember, as far as Hammond
knew, Ralph Paton had not applied to his uncle for help of late. That
looks as though he were being supplied with money elsewhere. Then there
is the fact that he was in some—how do you say—scrape?—which he feared
might get to his uncle’s ears. And finally there is the one you have
just mentioned.”

“Dear me,” I said, rather taken aback. “The case does seem black
against him.”

“Does it?” said Poirot. “That is where we disagree, you and I. Three
motives—it is almost too much. I am inclined to believe that, after
all, Ralph Paton is innocent.”




                              CHAPTER XIV

                             MRS. ACKROYD


After the evening talk I have just chronicled, the affair seemed to
me to enter on a different phase. The whole thing can be divided into
two parts, each clear and distinct from the other. Part I. ranges from
Ackroyd’s death on the Friday evening to the following Monday night.
It is the straight-forward narrative of what occurred, as presented
to Hercule Poirot. I was at Poirot’s elbow the whole time. I saw what
he saw. I tried my best to read his mind. As I know now, I failed in
this latter task. Though Poirot showed me all his discoveries—as, for
instance, the gold wedding-ring—he held back the vital and yet logical
impressions that he formed. As I came to know later, this secrecy was
characteristic of him. He would throw out hints and suggestions, but
beyond that he would not go.

As I say, up till the Monday evening, my narrative might have been that
of Poirot himself. I played Watson to his Sherlock. But after Monday
our ways diverged. Poirot was busy on his own account. I got to hear
of what he was doing, because, in King’s Abbot, you get to hear of
everything, but he did not take me into his confidence beforehand. And
I, too, had my own preoccupations.

On looking back, the thing that strikes me most is the piecemeal
character of this period. Every one had a hand in the elucidation of
the mystery. It was rather like a jig-saw puzzle to which every one
contributed their own little piece of knowledge or discovery. But their
task ended there. To Poirot alone belongs the renown of fitting those
pieces into their correct place.

Some of the incidents seemed at the time irrelevant and unmeaning.
There was, for instance, the question of the black boots. But that
comes later.... To take things strictly in chronological order, I must
begin with the summons from Mrs. Ackroyd.

She sent for me early on Tuesday morning, and since the summons sounded
an urgent one, I hastened there, expecting to find her _in extremis_.

The lady was in bed. So much did she concede to the etiquette of the
situation. She gave me her bony hand, and indicated a chair drawn up to
the bedside.

“Well, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said, “and what’s the matter with you?”

I spoke with that kind of spurious geniality which seems to be expected
of general practitioners.

“I’m prostrated,” said Mrs. Ackroyd in a faint voice. “Absolutely
prostrated. It’s the shock of poor Roger’s death. They say these
things often aren’t felt at the _time_, you know. It’s the reaction
afterwards.”

It is a pity that a doctor is precluded by his profession from being
able sometimes to say what he really thinks.

I would have given anything to be able to answer “Bunkum!”

Instead, I suggested a tonic. Mrs. Ackroyd accepted the tonic. One
move in the game seemed now to be concluded. Not for a moment did I
imagine that I had been sent for because of the shock occasioned by
Ackroyd’s death. But Mrs. Ackroyd is totally incapable of pursuing
a straight-forward course on any subject. She always approaches her
object by tortuous means. I wondered very much why it was she had sent
for me.

“And then that scene—yesterday,” continued my patient.

She paused as though expecting me to take up a cue.

“What scene?”

“Doctor, how can you? Have you forgotten? That dreadful little
Frenchman—or Belgian—or whatever he is. Bullying us all like he did. It
has quite upset me. Coming on top of Roger’s death.”

“I’m very sorry, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said.

“I don’t know what he meant—shouting at us like he did. I should hope I
know my duty too well to _dream_ of concealing anything. I have given
the police _every_ assistance in my power.”

Mrs. Ackroyd paused, and I said, “Quite so.” I was beginning to have a
glimmering of what all the trouble was about.

“No one can say that I have failed in my duty,” continued Mrs. Ackroyd.
“I am sure Inspector Raglan is perfectly satisfied. Why should this
little upstart of a foreigner make a fuss? A most ridiculous-looking
creature he is too—just like a comic Frenchman in a revue. I can’t
think why Flora insisted on bringing him into the case. She never said
a word to me about it. Just went off and did it on her own. Flora is
too independent. I am a woman of the world and her mother. She should
have come to me for advice first.”

I listened to all this in silence.

“What does he think? That’s what I want to know. Does he actually
imagine I’m hiding something? He—he—positively _accused_ me yesterday.”

I shrugged my shoulders.

“It is surely of no consequence, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said. “Since you are
not concealing anything, any remarks he may have made do not apply to
you.”

Mrs. Ackroyd went off at a tangent, after her usual fashion.

“Servants are so tiresome,” she said. “They gossip, and talk amongst
themselves. And then it gets round—and all the time there’s probably
nothing in it at all.”

“Have the servants been talking?” I asked. “What about?”

Mrs. Ackroyd cast a very shrewd glance at me. It quite threw me off my
balance.

“I was sure _you’d_ know, doctor, if any one did. You were with M.
Poirot all the time, weren’t you?”

“I was.”

“Then of course you know. It was that girl, Ursula Bourne, wasn’t it?
Naturally—she’s leaving. She _would_ want to make all the trouble
she could. Spiteful, that’s what they are. They’re all alike. Now,
you being there, doctor, you must know exactly what she did say? I’m
most anxious that no wrong impression should get about. After all,
you don’t repeat every little detail to the police, do you? There are
family matters sometimes—nothing to do with the question of the murder.
But if the girl was spiteful, she may have made out all sorts of
things.”

I was shrewd enough to see that a very real anxiety lay behind these
outpourings. Poirot had been justified in his premises. Of the six
people round the table yesterday, Mrs. Ackroyd at least had had
something to hide. It was for me to discover what that something might
be.

“If I were you, Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said brusquely, “I should make a clean
breast of things.”

She gave a little scream.

“Oh! doctor, how can you be so abrupt. It sounds as though—as
though——And I can explain everything so simply.”

“Then why not do so,” I suggested.

Mrs. Ackroyd took out a frilled handkerchief, and became tearful.

“I thought, doctor, that you might put it to M. Poirot—explain it, you
know—because it’s so difficult for a foreigner to see our point of
view. And you don’t know—nobody could know—what I’ve had to contend
with. A martyrdom—a long martyrdom. That’s what my life has been. I
don’t like to speak ill of the dead—but there it is. Not the smallest
bill, but it had all to be gone over—just as though Roger had had a
few miserly hundreds a year instead of being (as Mr. Hammond told me
yesterday) one of the wealthiest men in these parts.”

Mrs. Ackroyd paused to dab her eyes with the frilled handkerchief.

“Yes,” I said encouragingly. “You were talking about bills?”

“Those dreadful bills. And some I didn’t like to show Roger at all.
They were things a man wouldn’t understand. He would have said the
things weren’t necessary. And of course they mounted up, you know, and
they kept coming in——”

She looked at me appealingly, as though asking me to condole with her
on this striking peculiarity.

“It’s a habit they have,” I agreed.

“And the tone altered—became quite abusive. I assure you, doctor,
I was becoming a nervous wreck. I couldn’t sleep at nights. And a
dreadful fluttering round the heart. And then I got a letter from a
Scotch gentleman—as a matter of fact there were two letters—both Scotch
gentlemen. Mr. Bruce MacPherson was one, and the other were Colin
MacDonald. Quite a coincidence.”

“Hardly that,” I said dryly. “They are usually Scotch gentlemen, but I
suspect a Semitic strain in their ancestry.”

“Ten pounds to ten thousand on note of hand alone,” murmured Mrs.
Ackroyd reminiscently. “I wrote to one of them, but it seemed there
were difficulties.”

She paused.

I gathered that we were just coming to delicate ground. I have never
known any one more difficult to bring to the point.

“You see,” murmured Mrs. Ackroyd, “it’s all a question of expectations,
isn’t it? Testamentary expectations. And though, of course, I expected
that Roger would provide for me, I didn’t _know_. I thought that if
only I could glance over a copy of his will—not in any sense of vulgar
prying—but just so that I could make my own arrangements.”

She glanced sideways at me. The position was now very delicate indeed.
Fortunately words, ingeniously used, will serve to mask the ugliness of
naked facts.

“I could only tell this to you, dear Dr. Sheppard,” said Mrs. Ackroyd
rapidly. “I can trust you not to misjudge me, and to represent the
matter in the right light to M. Poirot. It was on Friday afternoon——”

She came to a stop and swallowed uncertainly.

“Yes,” I repeated encouragingly. “On Friday afternoon. Well?”

“Every one was out, or so I thought. And I went into Roger’s study—I
had some real reason for going there—I mean, there was nothing
underhand about it. And as I saw all the papers heaped on the desk, it
just came to me, like a flash: ‘I wonder if Roger keeps his will in
one of the drawers of the desk.’ I’m so impulsive, always was, from a
child. I do things on the spur of the moment. He’d left his keys—very
careless of him—in the lock of the top drawer.”

“I see,” I said helpfully. “So you searched the desk. Did you find the
will?”

Mrs. Ackroyd gave a little scream, and I realized that I had not been
sufficiently diplomatic.

“How dreadful it sounds. But it wasn’t at all like that really.”

“Of course it wasn’t,” I said hastily. “You must forgive my unfortunate
way of putting things.”

“You see, men are so peculiar. In dear Roger’s place, I should not
have objected to revealing the provisions of my will. But men are so
secretive. One is forced to adopt little subterfuges in self-defence.”

“And the result of the little subterfuge?” I asked.

“That’s just what I’m telling you. As I got to the bottom drawer,
Bourne came in. Most awkward. Of course I shut the drawer and stood
up, and I called her attention to a few specks of dust on the surface.
But I didn’t like the way she looked—quite respectful in manner, but a
very nasty light in her eyes. Almost contemptuous, if you know what I
mean. I never have liked that girl very much. She’s a good servant, and
she says Ma’am, and doesn’t object to wearing caps and aprons (which
I declare to you a lot of them do nowadays), and she can say ‘Not at
home’ without scruples if she has to answer the door instead of Parker,
and she doesn’t have those peculiar gurgling noises inside which so
many parlormaids seem to have when they wait at table——Let me see,
where was I?”

“You were saying, that in spite of several valuable qualities, you
never liked Bourne.”

“No more I do. She’s—odd. There’s something different about her from
the others. Too well educated, that’s my opinion. You can’t tell who
are ladies and who aren’t nowadays.”

“And what happened next?” I asked.

“Nothing. At least, Roger came in. And I thought he was out for a
walk. And he said: ‘What’s all this?’ and I said, ‘Nothing. I just came
in to fetch _Punch_.’ And I took _Punch_ and went out with it. Bourne
stayed behind. I heard her asking Roger if she could speak to him for a
minute. I went straight up to my room, to lie down. I was very upset.”

There was a pause.

“You will explain to M. Poirot, won’t you? You can see for yourself
what a trivial matter the whole thing was. But, of course, when he was
so stern about concealing things, I thought of this at once. Bourne
may have made some extraordinary story out of it, but you can explain,
can’t you?”

“That is all?” I said. “You have told me everything?”

“Ye-es,” said Mrs. Ackroyd. “Oh! yes,” she added firmly.

But I had noted the momentary hesitation, and I knew that there was
still something she was keeping back. It was nothing less than a flash
of sheer genius that prompted me to ask the question I did.

“Mrs. Ackroyd,” I said, “was it you who left the silver table open?”

I had my answer in the blush of guilt that even rouge and powder could
not conceal.

“How did you know?” she whispered.

“It was you, then?”

“Yes—I—you see—there were one or two pieces of old silver—very
interesting. I had been reading up the subject and there was an
illustration of quite a small piece which had fetched an immense
sum at Christy’s. It looked to me just the same as the one in the
silver table. I thought I would take it up to London with me when I
went—and—and have it valued. Then if it really was a valuable piece,
just think what a charming surprise it would have been for Roger?”

I refrained from comments, accepting Mrs. Ackroyd’s story on its
merits. I even forbore to ask her why it was necessary to abstract what
she wanted in such a surreptitious manner.

“Why did you leave the lid open?” I asked. “Did you forget?”

“I was startled,” said Mrs. Ackroyd. “I heard footsteps coming along
the terrace outside. I hastened out of the room and just got up the
stairs before Parker opened the front door to you.”

“That must have been Miss Russell,” I said thoughtfully. Mrs. Ackroyd
had revealed to me one fact that was extremely interesting. Whether her
designs upon Ackroyd’s silver had been strictly honorable I neither
knew nor cared. What did interest me was the fact that Miss Russell
must have entered the drawing-room by the window, and that I had not
been wrong when I judged her to be out of breath with running. Where
had she been? I thought of the summer-house and the scrap of cambric.

“I wonder if Miss Russell has her handkerchiefs starched!” I exclaimed
on the spur of the moment.

Mrs. Ackroyd’s start recalled me to myself, and I rose.

“You think you can explain to M. Poirot?” she asked anxiously.

“Oh, certainly. Absolutely.”

I got away at last, after being forced to listen to more justifications
of her conduct.

The parlormaid was in the hall, and it was she who helped me on with my
overcoat. I observed her more closely than I had done heretofore. It
was clear that she had been crying.

“How is it,” I asked, “that you told us that Mr. Ackroyd sent for you
on Friday to his study? I hear now that it was _you_ who asked to speak
to _him_?”

For a minute the girl’s eyes dropped before mine.

Then she spoke.

“I meant to leave in any case,” she said uncertainly.

I said no more. She opened the front door for me. Just as I was passing
out, she said suddenly in a low voice:—

“Excuse me, sir, is there any news of Captain Paton?”

I shook my head, looking at her inquiringly.

“He ought to come back,” she said. “Indeed—indeed he ought to come
back.”

She was looking at me with appealing eyes.

“Does no one know where he is?” she asked.

“Do you?” I said sharply.

She shook her head.

“No, indeed. I know nothing. But any one who was a friend to him would
tell him this: he ought to come back.”

I lingered, thinking that perhaps the girl would say more. Her next
question surprised me.

“When do they think the murder was done? Just before ten o’clock?”

“That is the idea,” I said. “Between a quarter to ten and the hour.”

“Not earlier? Not before a quarter to ten?”

I looked at her attentively. She was so clearly eager for a reply in
the affirmative.

“That’s out of the question,” I said. “Miss Ackroyd saw her uncle alive
at a quarter to ten.”

She turned away, and her whole figure seemed to droop.

“A handsome girl,” I said to myself as I drove off. “An exceedingly
handsome girl.”

Caroline was at home. She had had a visit from Poirot and was very
pleased and important about it.

“I am helping him with the case,” she explained.

I felt rather uneasy. Caroline is bad enough as it is. What will she be
like with her detective instincts encouraged?

“Are you going round the neighborhood looking for Ralph Paton’s
mysterious girl?” I inquired.

“I might do that on my own account,” said Caroline. “No, this is a
special thing M. Poirot wants me to find out for him.”

“What is it?” I asked.

“He wants to know whether Ralph Paton’s boots were black or brown,”
said Caroline with tremendous solemnity.

I stared at her. I see now that I was unbelievably stupid about these
boots. I failed altogether to grasp the point.

“They were brown shoes,” I said. “I saw them.”

“Not shoes, James, boots. M. Poirot wants to know whether a pair of
boots Ralph had with him at the hotel were brown or black. A lot hangs
on it.”

Call me dense if you like. I didn’t see.

“And how are you going to find out?” I asked.

Caroline said there would be no difficulty about that. Our Annie’s
dearest friend was Miss Ganett’s maid, Clara. And Clara was walking
out with the boots at the Three Boars. The whole thing was simplicity
itself, and by the aid of Miss Ganett, who coöperated loyally, at once
giving Clara leave of absence, the matter was rushed through at express
speed.

It was when we were sitting down to lunch that Caroline remarked, with
would-be unconcern:—

“About those boots of Ralph Paton’s.”

“Well,” I said, “what about them?”

“M. Poirot thought they were probably brown. He was wrong. They’re
black.”

And Caroline nodded her head several times. She evidently felt that she
had scored a point over Poirot.

I did not answer. I was puzzling over what the color of a pair of Ralph
Paton’s boots had to do with the case.




                              CHAPTER XV

                           GEOFFREY RAYMOND


I was to have a further proof that day of the success of Poirot’s
tactics. That challenge of his had been a subtle touch born of his
knowledge of human nature. A mixture of fear and guilt had wrung the
truth from Mrs. Ackroyd. She was the first to react.

That afternoon when I returned from seeing my patients, Caroline told
me that Geoffrey Raymond had just left.

“Did he want to see me?” I asked, as I hung up my coat in the hall.

Caroline was hovering by my elbow.

“It was M. Poirot he wanted to see,” she said. “He’d just come from The
Larches. M. Poirot was out. Mr. Raymond thought that he might be here,
or that you might know where he was.”

“I haven’t the least idea.”

“I tried to make him wait,” said Caroline, “but he said he would call
back at The Larches in half an hour, and went away down the village. A
great pity, because M. Poirot came in practically the minute after he
left.”

“Came in here?”

“No, to his own house.”

“How do you know?”

“The side window,” said Caroline briefly.

It seemed to me that we had now exhausted the topic. Caroline thought
otherwise.

“Aren’t you going across?”

“Across where?”

“To The Larches, of course.”

“My dear Caroline,” I said, “what for?”

“Mr. Raymond wanted to see him very particularly,” said Caroline. “You
might hear what it’s all about.”

I raised my eyebrows.

“Curiosity is not my besetting sin,” I remarked coldly. “I can exist
comfortably without knowing exactly what my neighbors are doing and
thinking.”

“Stuff and nonsense, James,” said my sister. “You want to know just
as much as I do. You’re not so honest, that’s all. You always have to
pretend.”

“Really, Caroline,” I said, and retired into my surgery.

Ten minutes later Caroline tapped at the door and entered. In her hand
she held what seemed to be a pot of jam.

“I wonder, James,” she said, “if you would mind taking this pot of
medlar jelly across to M. Poirot? I promised it to him. He has never
tasted any home-made medlar jelly.”

“Why can’t Annie go?” I asked coldly.

“She’s doing some mending. I can’t spare her.”

Caroline and I looked at each other.

“Very well,” I said, rising. “But if I take the beastly thing, I shall
just leave it at the door. You understand that?”

My sister raised her eyebrows.

“Naturally,” she said. “Who suggested you should do anything else?”

The honors were with Caroline.

“If you _do_ happen to see M. Poirot,” she said, as I opened the front
door, “you might tell him about the boots.”

It was a most subtle parting shot. I wanted dreadfully to understand
the enigma of the boots. When the old lady with the Breton cap opened
the door to me, I found myself asking if M. Poirot was in, quite
automatically.

Poirot sprang up to meet me, with every appearance of pleasure.

“Sit down, my good friend,” he said. “The big chair? This small one?
The room is not too hot, no?”

I thought it was stifling, but refrained from saying so. The windows
were closed, and a large fire burned in the grate.

“The English people, they have a mania for the fresh air,” declared
Poirot. “The big air, it is all very well outside, where it belongs.
Why admit it to the house? But let us not discuss such banalities. You
have something for me, yes?”

“Two things,” I said. “First—this—from my sister.”

I handed over the pot of medlar jelly.

“How kind of Mademoiselle Caroline. She has remembered her promise. And
the second thing?”

“Information—of a kind.”

And I told him of my interview with Mrs. Ackroyd. He listened with
interest, but not much excitement.

“It clears the ground,” he said thoughtfully. “And it has a certain
value as confirming the evidence of the housekeeper. She said, you
remember, that she found the silver table lid open and closed it down
in passing.”

“What about her statement that she went into the drawing-room to see if
the flowers were fresh?”

“Ah! we never took that very seriously, did we, my friend? It was
patently an excuse, trumped up in a hurry, by a woman who felt it
urgent to explain her presence—which, by the way, you would probably
never have thought of questioning. I considered it possible that her
agitation might arise from the fact that she had been tampering with
the silver table, but I think now that we must look for another cause.”

“Yes,” I said. “Whom did she go out to meet? And why?”

“You think she went to meet some one?”

“I do.”

Poirot nodded.

“So do I,” he said thoughtfully.

There was a pause.

“By the way,” I said, “I’ve got a message for you from my sister. Ralph
Paton’s boots were black, not brown.”

I was watching him closely as I gave the message, and I fancied that
I saw a momentary flicker of discomposure. If so, it passed almost
immediately.

“She is absolutely positive they are not brown?”

“Absolutely.”

“Ah!” said Poirot regretfully. “That is a pity.”

And he seemed quite crestfallen.

He entered into no explanations, but at once started a new subject of
conversation.

“The housekeeper, Miss Russell, who came to consult you on that Friday
morning—is it indiscreet to ask what passed at the interview—apart from
the medical details, I mean?”

“Not at all,” I said. “When the professional part of the conversation
was over, we talked for a few minutes about poisons, and the ease or
difficulty of detecting them, and about drug-taking and drug-takers.”

“With special reference to cocaine?” asked Poirot.

“How did you know?” I asked, somewhat surprised.

For answer, the little man rose and crossed the room to where
newspapers were filed. He brought me a copy of the _Daily Budget_,
dated Friday, 16th September, and showed me an article dealing with the
smuggling of cocaine. It was a somewhat lurid article, written with an
eye to picturesque effect.

“That is what put cocaine into her head, my friend,” he said.

I would have catechized him further, for I did not quite understand his
meaning, but at that moment the door opened and Geoffrey Raymond was
announced.

He came in fresh and debonair as ever, and greeted us both.

“How are you, doctor? M. Poirot, this is the second time I’ve been here
this morning. I was anxious to catch you.”

“Perhaps I’d better be off,” I suggested rather awkwardly.

“Not on my account, doctor. No, it’s just this,” he went on, seating
himself at a wave of invitation from Poirot, “I’ve got a confession to
make.”

“_En verité_?” said Poirot, with an air of polite interest.

“Oh, it’s of no consequence, really. But, as a matter of fact, my
conscience has been pricking me ever since yesterday afternoon. You
accused us all of keeping back something, M. Poirot. I plead guilty.
I’ve had something up my sleeve.”

“And what is that, M. Raymond?”

“As I say, it’s nothing of consequence—just this. I was in debt—badly,
and that legacy came in the nick of time. Five hundred pounds puts me
on my feet again with a little to spare.”

He smiled at us both with that engaging frankness that made him such a
likable youngster.

“You know how it is. Suspicious looking policeman—don’t like to admit
you were hard up for money—think it will look bad to them. But I was
a fool, really, because Blunt and I were in the billiard room from a
quarter to ten onwards, so I’ve got a watertight alibi and nothing to
fear. Still, when you thundered out that stuff about concealing things,
I felt a nasty prick of conscience, and I thought I’d like to get it
off my mind.”

He got up again and stood smiling at us.

“You are a very wise young man,” said Poirot, nodding at him with
approval. “See you, when I know that any one is hiding things from me,
I suspect that the thing hidden may be something very bad indeed. You
have done well.”

“I’m glad I’m cleared from suspicion,” laughed Raymond. “I’ll be off
now.”

“So that is that,” I remarked, as the door closed behind the young
secretary.

“Yes,” agreed Poirot. “A mere bagatelle—but if he had not been in the
billiard room—who knows? After all, many crimes have been committed for
the sake of less than five hundred pounds. It all depends on what sum
is sufficient to break a man. A question of the relativity, is it not
so? Have you reflected, my friend, that many people in that house stood
to benefit by Mr. Ackroyd’s death? Mrs. Ackroyd, Miss Flora, young Mr.
Raymond, the housekeeper, Miss Russell. Only one, in fact, does not,
Major Blunt.”

His tone in uttering that name was so peculiar that I looked up,
puzzled.

“I don’t quite understand you?” I said.

“Two of the people I accused have given me the truth.”

“You think Major Blunt has something to conceal also?”

“As for that,” remarked Poirot nonchalantly, “there is a saying, is
there not, that Englishmen conceal only one thing—their love? And Major
Blunt, I should say, is not good at concealments.”

“Sometimes,” I said, “I wonder if we haven’t rather jumped to
conclusions on one point.”

“What is that?”

“We’ve assumed that the blackmailer of Mrs. Ferrars is necessarily the
murderer of Mr. Ackroyd. Mightn’t we be mistaken?”

Poirot nodded energetically.

“Very good. Very good indeed. I wondered if that idea would come to
you. Of course it is possible. But we must remember one point. The
letter disappeared. Still, that, as you say, may not necessarily mean
that the murderer took it. When you first found the body, Parker may
have abstracted the letter unnoticed by you.”

“Parker?”

“Yes, Parker. I always come back to Parker—not as the murderer—no, he
did not commit the murder; but who is more suitable than he as the
mysterious scoundrel who terrorized Mrs. Ferrars? He may have got his
information about Mr. Ferrars’s death from one of the King’s Paddock
servants. At any rate, he is more likely to have come upon it than a
casual guest such as Blunt, for instance.”

“Parker might have taken the letter,” I admitted. “It wasn’t till later
that I noticed it was gone.”

“How much later? After Blunt and Raymond were in the room, or before?”

“I can’t remember,” I said slowly. “I think it was before—no,
afterwards. Yes, I’m almost sure it was afterwards.”

“That widens the field to three,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “But Parker
is the most likely. It is in my mind to try a little experiment with
Parker. How say you, my friend, will you accompany me to Fernly?”

I acquiesced, and we set out at once. Poirot asked to see Miss Ackroyd,
and presently Flora came to us.

“Mademoiselle Flora,” said Poirot, “I have to confide in you a little
secret. I am not yet satisfied of the innocence of Parker. I propose to
make a little experiment with your assistance. I want to reconstruct
some of his actions on that night. But we must think of something to
tell him—ah! I have it. I wish to satisfy myself as to whether voices
in the little lobby could have been heard outside on the terrace. Now,
ring for Parker, if you will be so good.”

I did so, and presently the butler appeared, suave as ever.

“You rang, sir?”

“Yes, my good Parker. I have in mind a little experiment. I have placed
Major Blunt on the terrace outside the study window. I want to see if
any one there could have heard the voices of Miss Ackroyd and yourself
in the lobby that night. I want to enact that little scene over again.
Perhaps you would fetch the tray or whatever it was you were carrying?”

Parker vanished, and we repaired to the lobby outside the study door.
Presently we heard a chink in the outer hall, and Parker appeared in
the doorway carrying a tray with a siphon, a decanter of whisky, and
two glasses on it.

“One moment,” cried Poirot, raising his hand and seemingly very
excited. “We must have everything in order. Just as it occurred. It is
a little method of mine.”

“A foreign custom, sir,” said Parker. “Reconstruction of the crime they
call it, do they not?”

He was quite imperturbable as he stood there politely waiting on
Poirot’s orders.

“Ah! he knows something, the good Parker,” cried Poirot. “He has read
of these things. Now, I beg you, let us have everything of the most
exact. You came from the outer hall—so. Mademoiselle was—where?”

“Here,” said Flora, taking up her stand just outside the study door.

“Quite right, sir,” said Parker.

“I had just closed the door,” continued Flora.

“Yes, miss,” agreed Parker. “Your hand was still on the handle as it is
now.”

“Then _allez_,” said Poirot. “Play me the little comedy.”

Flora stood with her hand on the door handle, and Parker came stepping
through the door from the hall, bearing the tray.

He stopped just inside the door. Flora spoke.

“Oh! Parker. Mr. Ackroyd doesn’t want to be disturbed again to-night.”

“Is that right?” she added in an undertone.

“To the best of my recollection, Miss Flora,” said Parker, “but I fancy
you used the word evening instead of night.” Then, raising his voice
in a somewhat theatrical fashion: “Very good, miss. Shall I lock up as
usual?”

“Yes, please.”

Parker retired through the door, Flora followed him, and started to
ascend the main staircase.

“Is that enough?” she asked over her shoulder.

“Admirable,” declared the little man, rubbing his hands. “By the way,
Parker, are you sure there were two glasses on the tray that evening?
Who was the second one for?”

“I always bring two glasses, sir,” said Parker. “Is there anything
further?”

“Nothing. I thank you.”

Parker withdrew, dignified to the last.

Poirot stood in the middle of the hall frowning. Flora came down and
joined us.

“Has your experiment been successful?” she asked. “I don’t quite
understand, you know——”

Poirot smiled admiringly at her.

“It is not necessary that you should,” he said. “But tell me, were
there indeed two glasses on Parker’s tray that night?”

Flora wrinkled her brows a minute.

“I really can’t remember,” she said. “I think there were. Is—is that
the object of your experiment?”

Poirot took her hand and patted it.

“Put it this way,” he said. “I am always interested to see if people
will speak the truth.”

“And did Parker speak the truth?”

“I rather think he did,” said Poirot thoughtfully.

A few minutes later saw us retracing our steps to the village.

“What was the point of that question about the glasses?” I asked
curiously.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“One must say something,” he remarked. “That particular question did as
well as any other.”

I stared at him.

“At any rate, my friend,” he said more seriously, “I know now something
I wanted to know. Let us leave it at that.”




                              CHAPTER XVI

                        AN EVENING AT MAH JONG


That night we had a little Mah Jong party. This kind of simple
entertainment is very popular in King’s Abbot. The guests arrive in
goloshes and waterproofs after dinner. They partake of coffee and later
of cake, sandwiches, and tea.

On this particular night our guests were Miss Ganett, and Colonel
Carter, who lives near the church. A good deal of gossip is handed
round at these evenings, sometimes seriously interfering with the
game in progress. We used to play bridge—chatty bridge of the worst
description. We find Mah Jong much more peaceful. The irritated demand
as to why on earth your partner did not lead a certain card is entirely
done away with, and though we still express criticisms frankly, there
is not the same acrimonious spirit.

“Very cold evening, eh, Sheppard?” said Colonel Carter, standing with
his back to the fire. Caroline had taken Miss Ganett to her own room,
and was there assisting her to disentangle herself from her many wraps.
“Reminds me of the Afghan passes.”

“Indeed?” I said politely.

“Very mysterious business this about poor Ackroyd,” continued the
colonel, accepting a cup of coffee. “A deuce of a lot behind it—that’s
what I say. Between you and me, Sheppard, I’ve heard the word blackmail
mentioned!”

The colonel gave me the look which might be tabulated “one man of the
world to another.”

“A woman in it, no doubt,” he said. “Depend upon it, a woman in it.”

Caroline and Miss Ganett joined us at this minute. Miss Ganett drank
coffee whilst Caroline got out the Mah Jong box and poured out the
tiles upon the table.

“Washing the tiles,” said the colonel facetiously. “That’s
right—washing the tiles, as we used to say in the Shanghai Club.”

It is the private opinion of both Caroline and myself that Colonel
Carter has never been in the Shanghai Club in his life. More, that he
has never been farther east than India, where he juggled with tins of
bully beef and plum and apple jam during the Great War. But the colonel
is determinedly military, and in King’s Abbot we permit people to
indulge their little idiosyncrasies freely.

“Shall we begin?” said Caroline.

We sat round the table. For some five minutes there was complete
silence, owing to the fact that there is tremendous secret competition
amongst us as to who can build their wall quickest.

“Go on, James,” said Caroline at last. “You’re East Wind.”

I discarded a tile. A round or two proceeded, broken by the monotonous
remarks of “Three Bamboos,” “Two Circles,” “Pung,” and frequently
from Miss Ganett “Unpung,” owing to that lady’s habit of too hastily
claiming tiles to which she had no right.

“I saw Flora Ackroyd this morning,” said Miss Ganett. “Pung—no—Unpung.
I made a mistake.”

“Four Circles,” said Caroline. “Where did you see her?”

“She didn’t see _me_,” said Miss Ganett, with that tremendous
significance only to be met with in small villages.

“Ah!” said Caroline interestedly. “Chow.”

“I believe,” said Miss Ganett, temporarily diverted, “that it’s the
right thing nowadays to say ‘Chee’ not ‘Chow.’”

“Nonsense,” said Caroline. “I have always said ‘_Chow_.’”

“In the Shanghai Club,” said Colonel Carter, “they say ‘_Chow_.’”

Miss Ganett retired, crushed.

“What were you saying about Flora Ackroyd?” asked Caroline, after a
moment or two devoted to the game. “Was she with any one?”

“Very much so,” said Miss Ganett.

The eyes of the two ladies met, and seemed to exchange information.

“Really,” said Caroline interestedly. “Is that it? Well, it doesn’t
surprise me in the least.”

“We’re waiting for you to discard, Miss Caroline,” said the colonel. He
sometimes affects the pose of the bluff male, intent on the game and
indifferent to gossip. But nobody is deceived.

“If you ask me,” said Miss Ganett. (“Was that a Bamboo you discarded,
dear? Oh! no, I see now—it was a Circle.) As I was saying, if you ask
me, Flora’s been exceedingly lucky. Exceedingly lucky she’s been.”

“How’s that, Miss Ganett?” asked the colonel. “I’ll Pung that Green
Dragon. How do you make out that Miss Flora’s been lucky? Very charming
girl and all that, I know.”

“I mayn’t know very much about crime,” said Miss Ganett, with the air
of one who knows everything there is to know, “but I can tell you one
thing. The first question that’s always asked is ‘Who last saw the
deceased alive?’ And the person who did is regarded with suspicion.
Now, Flora Ackroyd last saw her uncle alive. It might have looked very
nasty for her—very nasty indeed. It’s my opinion—and I give it for what
it’s worth, that Ralph Paton is staying away on her account, to draw
suspicion away from her.”

“Come, now,” I protested mildly, “you surely can’t suggest that a young
girl like Flora Ackroyd is capable of stabbing her uncle in cold blood?”

“Well, I don’t know,” said Miss Ganett. “I’ve just been reading a book
from the library about the underworld of Paris, and it says that some
of the worst women criminals are young girls with the faces of angels.”

“That’s in France,” said Caroline instantly.

“Just so,” said the colonel. “Now, I’ll tell you a very curious thing—a
story that was going round the Bazaars in India....”

The colonel’s story was one of interminable length, and of curiously
little interest. A thing that happened in India many years ago cannot
compare for a moment with an event that took place in King’s Abbot the
day before yesterday.

It was Caroline who brought the colonel’s story to a close by
fortunately going Mah Jong. After the slight unpleasantness always
occasioned by my corrections of Caroline’s somewhat faulty arithmetic,
we started a new hand.

“East Wind passes,” said Caroline. “I’ve got an idea of my own about
Ralph Paton. Three Characters. But I’m keeping it to myself for the
present.”

“Are you, dear?” said Miss Ganett. “Chow—I mean Pung.”

“Yes,” said Caroline firmly.

“Was it all right about the boots?” asked Miss Ganett. “Their being
black, I mean?”

“Quite all right,” said Caroline.

“What was the point, do you think?” asked Miss Ganett.

Caroline pursed up her lips, and shook her head with an air of knowing
all about it.

“Pung,” said Miss Ganett. “No—Unpung. I suppose that now the doctor’s
in with M. Poirot he knows all the secrets?”

“Far from it,” I said.

“James is so modest,” said Caroline. “Ah! a concealed Kong.”

The colonel gave vent to a whistle. For the moment gossip was
forgotten.

“Your own wind, too,” he said. “_And_ you’ve got two Pungs of Dragons.
We must be careful. Miss Caroline’s out for a big hand.”

We played for some minutes with no irrelevant conversation.

“This M. Poirot now,” said Colonel Carter, “is he really such a great
detective?”

“The greatest the world has ever known,” said Caroline solemnly. “He
had to come here incognito to avoid publicity.”

“Chow,” said Miss Ganett. “Quite wonderful for our little village, I’m
sure. By the way, Clara—my maid, you know—is great friends with Elsie,
the housemaid at Fernly, and what do you think Elsie told her? That
there’s been a lot of money stolen, and it’s her opinion—Elsie’s—I
mean, that the parlormaid had something to do with it. She’s leaving
at the month, and she’s crying a good deal at night. If you ask me,
the girl is very likely in league with a _gang_. She’s always been a
queer girl—she’s not friends with any of the girls round here. She
goes off by herself on her days out—very unnatural, I call it, and
most suspicious. I asked her once to come to our Girls’ Friendly
Evenings, but she refused, and then I asked her a few questions about
her home and her family—all that sort of thing, and I’m bound to say I
considered her manner most impertinent. Outwardly very respectful—but
she shut me up in the most barefaced way.”

Miss Ganett stopped for breath, and the colonel, who was totally
uninterested in the servant question, remarked that in the Shanghai
Club brisk play was the invariable rule.

We had a round of brisk play.

“That Miss Russell,” said Caroline. “She came here pretending to
consult James on Friday morning. It’s my opinion she wanted to see
where the poisons were kept. Five Characters.”

“Chow,” said Miss Ganett. “What an extraordinary idea? I wonder if you
can be right.”

“Talking of poisons,” said the colonel. “Eh—what? Haven’t I discarded?
Oh! Eight Bamboos.”

“Mah Jong!” said Miss Ganett.

Caroline was very much annoyed.

“One Red Dragon,” she said regretfully, “and I should have had a hand
of three doubles.”

“I’ve had two Red Dragons all the time,” I mentioned.

“So exactly like you, James,” said Caroline reproachfully. “You’ve no
conception of the spirit of the game.”

I myself thought I had played rather cleverly. I should have had to pay
Caroline an enormous amount if she had gone Mah Jong. Miss Ganett’s Mah
Jong was of the poorest variety possible, as Caroline did not fail to
point out to her.

East Wind passed, and we started a new hand in silence.

“What I was going to tell you just now was this,” said Caroline.

“Yes?” said Miss Ganett encouragingly.

“My idea about Ralph Paton, I mean.”

“Yes, dear,” said Miss Ganett, still more encouragingly. “Chow!”

“It’s a sign of weakness to Chow so early,” said Caroline severely.
“You should go for a big hand.”

“I know,” said Miss Ganett. “You were saying—about Ralph Paton, you
know?”

“Yes. Well, I’ve a pretty shrewd idea where he is.”

We all stopped to stare at her.

“This is very interesting, Miss Caroline,” said Colonel Carter. “All
your own idea, eh?”

“Well, not exactly. I’ll tell you about it. You know that big map of
the county we have in the hall?”

We all said Yes.

“As M. Poirot was going out the other day, he stopped and looked at it,
and he made some remark—I can’t remember exactly what it was. Something
about Cranchester being the only big town anywhere near us—which is
true, of course. But after he had gone—it came to me suddenly.”

“What came to you?”

“His meaning. Of course Ralph is in Cranchester.”

It was at that moment that I knocked down the rack that held my pieces.
My sister immediately reproved me for clumsiness, but half-heartedly.
She was intent on her theory.

“Cranchester, Miss Caroline?” said Colonel Carter. “Surely not
Cranchester! It’s so near.”

“That’s exactly it,” cried Caroline triumphantly. “It seems quite clear
by now that he didn’t get away from here by train. He must simply have
walked into Cranchester. And I believe he’s there still. No one would
dream of his being so near at hand.”

I pointed out several objections to the theory, but when once Caroline
has got something firmly into her head, nothing dislodges it.

“And you think M. Poirot has the same idea,” said Miss Ganett
thoughtfully. “It’s a curious coincidence, but I was out for a walk
this afternoon on the Cranchester road, and he passed me in a car
coming from that direction.”

We all looked at each other.

“Why, dear me,” said Miss Ganett suddenly, “I’m Mah Jong all the time,
and I never noticed it.”

Caroline’s attention was distracted from her own inventive exercises.
She pointed out to Miss Ganett that a hand consisting of mixed suits
and too many Chows was hardly worth going Mah Jong on. Miss Ganett
listened imperturbably and collected her counters.

“Yes, dear, I know what you mean,” she said. “But it rather depends on
what kind of a hand you have to start with, doesn’t it?”

“You’ll never get the big hands if you don’t go for them,” urged
Caroline.

“Well, we must all play our own way, mustn’t we?” said Miss Ganett. She
looked down at her counters. “After all, I’m up, so far.”

Caroline, who was considerably down, said nothing.

East Wind passed, and we set to once more. Annie brought in the tea
things. Caroline and Miss Ganett were both slightly ruffled as is
often the case during one of these festive evenings.

“If you would only play a leetle quicker, dear,” said Caroline, as Miss
Ganett hesitated over her discard. “The Chinese put down the tiles so
quickly it sounds like little birds pattering.”

For some few minutes we played like the Chinese.

“You haven’t contributed much to the sum of information, Sheppard,”
said Colonel Carter genially. “You’re a sly dog. Hand in glove with the
great detective, and not a hint as to the way things are going.”

“James is an extraordinary creature,” said Caroline. “He can _not_
bring himself to part with information.”

She looked at me with some disfavor.

“I assure you,” I said, “that I don’t know anything. Poirot keeps his
own counsel.”

“Wise man,” said the colonel with a chuckle. “He doesn’t give himself
away. But they’re wonderful fellows, these foreign detectives. Up to
all sorts of dodges, I believe.”

“Pung,” said Miss Ganett, in a tone of quiet triumph. “And Mah Jong.”

The situation became more strained. It was annoyance at Miss Ganett’s
going Mah Jong for the third time running which prompted Caroline to
say to me as we built a fresh wall:—

“You are too tiresome, James. You sit there like a dead head, and say
nothing at all!”

“But, my dear,” I protested, “I have really nothing to say—that is, of
the kind you mean.”

“Nonsense,” said Caroline, as she sorted her hand. “You _must_ know
something interesting.”

I did not answer for a moment. I was overwhelmed and intoxicated. I had
read of there being such a thing as the Perfect Winning—going Mah Jong
on one’s original hand. I had never hoped to hold the hand myself.

With suppressed triumph I laid my hand face upwards on the table.

“As they say in the Shanghai Club,” I remarked, “Tin-ho—the Perfect
Winning!”

The colonel’s eyes nearly bulged out of his head.

“Upon my soul,” he said. “What an extraordinary thing. I never saw that
happen before!”

It was then that I went on, goaded by Caroline’s gibes, and rendered
reckless by my triumph.

“And as to anything interesting,” I said. “What about a gold wedding
ring with a date and ‘From R.’ inside.”

I pass over the scene that followed. I was made to say exactly where
this treasure was found. I was made to reveal the date.

“March 13th,” said Caroline. “Just six months ago. Ah!”

Out of the babel of excited suggestions and suppositions three theories
were evolved:—

1. That of Colonel Carter: that Ralph was secretly married to Flora.
The first or most simple solution.

2. That of Miss Ganett: that Roger Ackroyd had been secretly married to
Mrs. Ferrars.

3. That of my sister: that Roger Ackroyd had married his housekeeper,
Miss Russell.

A fourth or super-theory was propounded by Caroline later as we went up
to bed.

“Mark my words,” she said suddenly, “I shouldn’t be at all surprised if
Geoffrey Raymond and Flora weren’t married.”

“Surely it would be ‘From G,’ not ‘From R’ then,” I suggested.

“You never know. Some girls call men by their surnames. And you heard
what Miss Ganett said this evening—about Flora’s carryings on.”

Strictly speaking, I had not heard Miss Ganett say anything of the
kind, but I respected Caroline’s knowledge of innuendoes.

“How about Hector Blunt,” I hinted. “If it’s anybody——”

“Nonsense,” said Caroline. “I dare say he admires her—may even be in
love with her. But depend upon it a girl isn’t going to fall in love
with a man old enough to be her father when there’s a good-looking
young secretary about. She may encourage Major Blunt just as a blind.
Girls are very artful. But there’s one thing I _do_ tell you, James
Sheppard. Flora Ackroyd does not care a penny piece for Ralph Paton,
and never has. You can take it from me.”

I took it from her meekly.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                                PARKER


It occurred to me the next morning that under the exhilaration
produced by Tin-ho, or the Perfect Winning, I might have been slightly
indiscreet. True, Poirot had not asked me to keep the discovery of
the ring to myself. On the other hand, he had said nothing about it
whilst at Fernly, and as far as I knew, I was the only person aware
that it had been found. I felt distinctly guilty. The fact was by now
spreading through King’s Abbot like wildfire. I was expecting wholesale
reproaches from Poirot any minute.

The joint funeral of Mrs. Ferrars and Roger Ackroyd was fixed for
eleven o’clock. It was a melancholy and impressive ceremony. All the
party from Fernly were there.

After it was over, Poirot, who had also been present, took me by the
arm, and invited me to accompany him back to The Larches. He was
looking very grave, and I feared that my indiscretion of the night
before had got round to his ears. But it soon transpired that his
thoughts were occupied by something of a totally different nature.

“See you,” he said. “We must act. With your help I propose to examine a
witness. We will question him, we will put such fear into him that the
truth is bound to come out.”

“What witness are you talking of?” I asked, very much surprised.

“Parker!” said Poirot. “I asked him to be at my house this morning at
twelve o’clock. He should await us there at this very minute.”

“What do you think,” I ventured, glancing sideways at his face.

“I know this—that I am not satisfied.”

“You think that it was he who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars?”

“Either that, or——”

“Well?” I said, after waiting a minute or two.

“My friend, I will say this to you—I hope it was he.”

The gravity of his manner, and something indefinable that tinged it,
reduced me to silence.

On arrival at The Larches, we were informed that Parker was already
there awaiting our return. As we entered the room, the butler rose
respectfully.

“Good morning, Parker,” said Poirot pleasantly. “One instant, I pray of
you.”

He removed his overcoat and gloves.

“Allow me, sir,” said Parker, and sprang forward to assist him. He
deposited the articles neatly on a chair by the door. Poirot watched
him with approval.

“Thank you, my good Parker,” he said. “Take a seat, will you not? What
I have to say may take some time.”

Parker seated himself with an apologetic bend of the head.

“Now what do you think I asked you to come here for this morning—eh?”

Parker coughed.

“I understood, sir, that you wished to ask me a few questions about my
late master—private like.”

“_Précisément_,” said Poirot, beaming. “Have you made many experiments
in blackmail?”

“Sir!”

The butler sprang to his feet.

“Do not excite yourself,” said Poirot placidly. “Do not play the farce
of the honest, injured man. You know all there is to know about the
blackmail, is it not so?”

“Sir, I—I’ve never—never been——”

“Insulted,” suggested Poirot, “in such a way before. Then why, my
excellent Parker, were you so anxious to overhear the conversation in
Mr. Ackroyd’s study the other evening, after you had caught the word
blackmail?”

“I wasn’t—I——”

“Who was your last master?” rapped out Poirot suddenly.

“My last master?”

“Yes, the master you were with before you came to Mr. Ackroyd.”

“A Major Ellerby, sir——”

Poirot took the words out of his mouth.

“Just so, Major Ellerby. Major Ellerby was addicted to drugs, was he
not? You traveled about with him. When he was in Bermuda there was some
trouble—a man was killed. Major Ellerby was partly responsible. It was
hushed up. But you knew about it. How much did Major Ellerby pay you to
keep your mouth shut?”

Parker was staring at him open-mouthed. The man had gone to pieces, his
cheeks shook flabbily.

“You see, me, I have made inquiries,” said Poirot pleasantly. “It is
as I say. You got a good sum then as blackmail, and Major Ellerby went
on paying you until he died. Now I want to hear about your latest
experiment.”

Parker still stared.

“It is useless to deny. Hercule Poirot _knows_. It is so, what I have
said about Major Ellerby, is it not?”

As though against his will, Parker nodded reluctantly once. His face
was ashen pale.

“But I never hurt a hair of Mr. Ackroyd’s head,” he moaned. “Honest to
God, sir, I didn’t. I’ve been afraid of this coming all the time. And I
tell you I didn’t—I didn’t kill him.”

His voice rose almost to a scream.

“I am inclined to believe you, my friend,” said Poirot. “You have not
the nerve—the courage. But I must have the truth.”

“I’ll tell you anything, sir, anything you want to know. It’s true that
I tried to listen that night. A word or two I heard made me curious.
And Mr. Ackroyd’s wanting not to be disturbed, and shutting himself up
with the doctor the way he did. It’s God’s own truth what I told the
police. I heard the word blackmail, sir, and well——”

He paused.

“You thought there might be something in it for you?” suggested Poirot
smoothly.

“Well—well, yes, I did, sir. I thought that if Mr. Ackroyd was being
blackmailed, why shouldn’t I have a share of the pickings?”

A very curious expression passed over Poirot’s face. He leaned forward.

“Had you any reason to suppose before that night that Mr. Ackroyd was
being blackmailed?”

“No, indeed, sir. It was a great surprise to me. Such a regular
gentleman in all his habits.”

“How much did you overhear?”

“Not very much, sir. There seemed what I might call a spite against me.
Of course I had to attend to my duties in the pantry. And when I did
creep along once or twice to the study it was no use. The first time
Dr. Sheppard came out and almost caught me in the act, and another time
Mr. Raymond passed me in the big hall and went that way, so I knew it
was no use; and when I went with the tray, Miss Flora headed me off.”

Poirot stared for a long time at the man, as if to test his sincerity.
Parker returned his gaze earnestly.

“I hope you believe me, sir. I’ve been afraid all along the police
would rake up that old business with Major Ellerby and be suspicious of
me in consequence.”

“_Eh bien_,” said Poirot at last. “I am disposed to believe you. But
there is one thing I must request of you—to show me your bank-book. You
have a bank-book, I presume?”

“Yes, sir, as a matter of fact, I have it with me now.”

With no sign of confusion, he produced it from his pocket. Poirot took
the slim, green-covered book and perused the entries.

“Ah! I perceive you have purchased £500 of National Savings
Certificates this year?”

“Yes, sir. I have already over a thousand pounds saved—the result of
my connection with—er—my late master, Major Ellerby. And I have had
quite a little flutter on some horses this year—very successful. If you
remember, sir, a rank outsider won the Jubilee. I was fortunate enough
to back it—£20.”

Poirot handed him back the book.

“I will wish you good-morning. I believe that you have told me the
truth. If you have not—so much the worse for you, my friend.”

When Parker had departed, Poirot picked up his overcoat once more.

“Going out again?” I asked.

“Yes, we will pay a little visit to the good M. Hammond.”

“You believe Parker’s story?”

“It is credible enough on the face of it. It seems clear that—unless
he is a very good actor indeed—he genuinely believes it was Ackroyd
himself who was the victim of blackmail. If so, he knows nothing at all
about the Mrs. Ferrars business.”

“Then in that case—who——”

“_Précisément!_ Who? But our visit to M. Hammond will accomplish one
purpose. It will either clear Parker completely or else——”

“Well?”

“I fall into the bad habit of leaving my sentences unfinished this
morning,” said Poirot apologetically. “You must bear with me.”

“By the way,” I said, rather sheepishly, “I’ve got a confession to
make. I’m afraid I have inadvertently let out something about that
ring.”

“What ring?”

“The ring you found in the goldfish pond.”

“Ah! yes,” said Poirot, smiling broadly.

“I hope you’re not annoyed? It was very careless of me.”

“But not at all, my good friend, not at all. I laid no commands upon
you. You were at liberty to speak of it if you so wished. She was
interested, your sister?”

“She was indeed. It created a sensation. All sorts of theories are
flying about.”

“Ah! And yet it is so simple. The true explanation leapt to the eye,
did it not?”

“Did it?” I said dryly.

Poirot laughed.

“The wise man does not commit himself,” he observed. “Is not that so?
But here we are at Mr. Hammond’s.”

The lawyer was in his office, and we were ushered in without any delay.
He rose and greeted us in his dry, precise manner.

Poirot came at once to the point.

“Monsieur, I desire from you certain information, that is, if you will
be so good as to give it to me. You acted, I understand, for the late
Mrs. Ferrars of King’s Paddock?”

I noticed the swift gleam of surprise which showed in the lawyer’s
eyes, before his professional reserve came down once more like a mask
over his face.

“Certainly. All her affairs passed through our hands.”

“Very good. Now, before I ask you to tell me anything, I should like
you to listen to the story Dr. Sheppard will relate to you. You have no
objection, have you, my friend, to repeating the conversation you had
with Mr. Ackroyd last Friday night?”

“Not in the least,” I said, and straightway began the recital of that
strange evening.

Hammond listened with close attention.

“That is all,” I said, when I had finished.

“Blackmail,” said the lawyer thoughtfully.

“You are surprised?” asked Poirot.

The lawyer took off his pince-nez and polished them with his
handkerchief.

“No,” he replied, “I can hardly say that I am surprised. I have
suspected something of the kind for some time.”

“That brings us,” said Poirot, “to the information for which I am
asking. If any one can give us an idea of the actual sums paid, you are
the man, monsieur.”

“I see no object in withholding the information,” said Hammond, after
a moment or two. “During the past year, Mrs. Ferrars has sold out
certain securities, and the money for them was paid into her account
and not reinvested. As her income was a large one, and she lived very
quietly after her husband’s death, it seems certain that these sums of
money were paid away for some special purpose. I once sounded her on
the subject, and she said that she was obliged to support several of
her husband’s poor relations. I let the matter drop, of course. Until
now, I have always imagined that the money was paid to some woman who
had had a claim on Ashley Ferrars. I never dreamed that Mrs. Ferrars
herself was involved.”

“And the amount?” asked Poirot.

“In all, I should say the various sums totaled at least twenty thousand
pounds.”

“Twenty thousand pounds!” I exclaimed. “In one year!”

“Mrs. Ferrars was a very wealthy woman,” said Poirot dryly. “And the
penalty for murder is not a pleasant one.”

“Is there anything else that I can tell you?” inquired Mr. Hammond.

“I thank you, no,” said Poirot, rising. “All my excuses for having
deranged you.”

“Not at all, not at all.”

“The word derange,” I remarked, when we were outside again, “is
applicable to mental disorder only.”

“Ah!” cried Poirot, “never will my English be quite perfect. A curious
language. I should then have said disarranged, _n’est-ce pas_?”

“Disturbed is the word you had in mind.”

“I thank you, my friend. The word exact, you are zealous for it. _Eh
bien_, what about our friend Parker now? With twenty thousand pounds
in hand, would he have continued being a butler? _Je ne pense pas._ It
is, of course, possible that he banked the money under another name,
but I am disposed to believe he spoke the truth to us. If he is a
scoundrel, he is a scoundrel on a mean scale. He has not the big ideas.
That leaves us as a possibility, Raymond, or—well—Major Blunt.”

“Surely not Raymond,” I objected. “Since we know that he was
desperately hard up for a matter of five hundred pounds.”

“That is what he says, yes.”

“And as to Hector Blunt——”

“I will tell you something as to the good Major Blunt,” interrupted
Poirot. “It is my business to make inquiries. I make them. _Eh
bien_—that legacy of which he speaks, I have discovered that the amount
of it was close upon twenty thousand pounds. What do you think of that?”

I was so taken aback that I could hardly speak.

“It’s impossible,” I said at last. “A well-known man like Hector Blunt.”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Who knows? At least he is a man with big ideas. I confess that I
hardly see him as a blackmailer, but there is another possibility that
you have not even considered.”

“What is that?”

“The fire, my friend. Ackroyd himself may have destroyed that letter,
blue envelope and all, after you left him.”

“I hardly think that likely,” I said slowly. “And yet—of course, it
may be so. He might have changed his mind.”

We had just arrived at my house, and on the spur of the moment I
invited Poirot to come in and take pot luck.

I thought Caroline would be pleased with me, but it is hard to satisfy
one’s women folk. It appears that we were eating chops for lunch—the
kitchen staff being regaled on tripe and onions. And two chops set
before three people are productive of embarrassment.

But Caroline is seldom daunted for long. With magnificent mendacity,
she explained to Poirot that although James laughed at her for
doing so, she adhered strictly to a vegetarian diet. She descanted
ecstatically on the delights of nut cutlets (which I am quite sure
she has never tasted) and ate a Welsh rarebit with gusto and frequent
cutting remarks as to the dangers of “flesh” foods.

Afterwards, when we were sitting in front of the fire and smoking,
Caroline attacked Poirot directly.

“Not found Ralph Paton yet?” she asked.

“Where should I find him, mademoiselle?”

“I thought, perhaps, you’d found him in Cranchester,” said Caroline,
with intense meaning in her tone.

Poirot looked merely bewildered.

“In Cranchester? But why in Cranchester?”

I enlightened him with a touch of malice.

“One of our ample staff of private detectives happened to see you in a
car on the Cranchester road yesterday,” I explained.

Poirot’s bewilderment vanished. He laughed heartily.

“Ah, that! A simple visit to the dentist, _c’est tout_. My tooth, it
aches. I go there. My tooth, it is at once better. I think to return
quickly. The dentist, he says No. Better to have it out. I argue. He
insists. He has his way! That particular tooth, it will never ache
again.”

Caroline collapsed rather like a pricked balloon.

We fell to discussing Ralph Paton.

“A weak nature,” I insisted. “But not a vicious one.”

“Ah!” said Poirot. “But weakness, where does it end?”

“Exactly,” said Caroline. “Take James here—weak as water, if I weren’t
about to look after him.”

“My dear Caroline,” I said irritably, “can’t you talk without dragging
in personalities?”

“You _are_ weak, James,” said Caroline, quite unmoved. “I’m eight years
older than you are—oh! I don’t mind M. Poirot knowing that——”

“I should never have guessed it, mademoiselle,” said Poirot, with a
gallant little bow.

“Eight years older. But I’ve always considered it my duty to look after
you. With a bad bringing up, Heaven knows what mischief you might have
got into by now.”

“I might have married a beautiful adventuress,” I murmured, gazing at
the ceiling, and blowing smoke rings.

“Adventuress!” said Caroline, with a snort. “If we’re talking of
adventuresses——”

She left the sentence unfinished.

“Well?” I said, with some curiosity.

“Nothing. But I can think of some one not a hundred miles away.”

Then she turned to Poirot suddenly.

“James sticks to it that you believe some one in the house committed
the murder. All I can say is, you’re wrong.”

“I should not like to be wrong,” said Poirot. “It is not—how do you
say—my _métier_?”

“I’ve got the facts pretty clearly,” continued Caroline, taking no
notice of Poirot’s remark, “from James and others. As far as I can see,
of the people in the house, only two _could_ have had the chance of
doing it. Ralph Paton and Flora Ackroyd.”

“My dear Caroline——”

“Now, James, don’t interrupt me. I know what I’m talking about. Parker
met her _outside_ the door, didn’t he? He didn’t hear her uncle saying
good-night to her. She could have killed him then and there.”

“Caroline.”

“I’m not saying she _did_, James. I’m saying she _could_ have done. As
a matter of fact, though Flora is like all these young girls nowadays,
with no veneration for their betters and thinking they know best on
every subject under the sun, I don’t for a minute believe she’d kill
even a chicken. But there it is. Mr. Raymond and Major Blunt have
alibis. Mrs. Ackroyd’s got an alibi. Even that Russell woman seems to
have one—and a good job for her it is she has. Who is left? Only Ralph
and Flora! And say what you will, I don’t believe Ralph Paton is a
murderer. A boy we’ve known all our lives.”

Poirot was silent for a minute, watching the curling smoke rise from
his cigarette. When at last he spoke, it was in a gentle far-away voice
that produced a curious impression. It was totally unlike his usual
manner.

“Let us take a man—a very ordinary man. A man with no idea of murder
in his heart. There is in him somewhere a strain of weakness—deep
down. It has so far never been called into play. Perhaps it never will
be—and if so he will go to his grave honored and respected by every
one. But let us suppose that something occurs. He is in difficulties—or
perhaps not that even. He may stumble by accident on a secret—a secret
involving life or death to some one. And his first impulse will be to
speak out—to do his duty as an honest citizen. And then the strain of
weakness tells. Here is a chance of money—a great amount of money.
He wants money—he desires it—and it is so easy. He has to do nothing
for it—just keep silence. That is the beginning. The desire for money
grows. He must have more—and more! He is intoxicated by the gold mine
which has opened at his feet. He becomes greedy. And in his greed he
overreaches himself. One can press a man as far as one likes—but with
a woman one must not press too far. For a woman has at heart a great
desire to speak the truth. How many husbands who have deceived their
wives go comfortably to their graves, carrying their secret with them!
How many wives who have deceived their husbands wreck their lives by
throwing the fact in those same husbands’ teeth! They have been pressed
too far. In a reckless moment (which they will afterwards regret, _bien
entendu_) they fling safety to the winds and turn at bay, proclaiming
the truth with great momentary satisfaction to themselves. So it was, I
think, in this case. The strain was too great. And so there came your
proverb, the death of the goose that laid the golden eggs. But that is
not the end. Exposure faced the man of whom we are speaking. And he is
not the same man he was—say, a year ago. His moral fiber is blunted.
He is desperate. He is fighting a losing battle, and he is prepared to
take any means that come to his hand, for exposure means ruin to him.
And so—the dagger strikes!”

He was silent for a moment. It was as though he had laid a spell upon
the room. I cannot try to describe the impression his words produced.
There was something in the merciless analysis, and the ruthless power
of vision which struck fear into both of us.

“Afterwards,” he went on softly, “the danger removed, he will be
himself again, normal, kindly. But if the need again arises, then once
more he will strike.”

Caroline roused herself at last.

“You are speaking of Ralph Paton,” she said. “You may be right, you may
not, but you have no business to condemn a man unheard.”

The telephone bell rang sharply. I went out into the hall, and took off
the receiver.

“What?” I said. “Yes. Dr. Sheppard speaking.”

I listened for a minute or two, then replied briefly. Replacing the
receiver, I went back into the drawing-room.

“Poirot,” I said, “they have detained a man at Liverpool. His name is
Charles Kent, and he is believed to be the stranger who visited Fernly
that night. They want me to go to Liverpool at once and identify him.”




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                             CHARLES KENT


Half an hour later saw Poirot, myself, and Inspector Raglan in the
train on the way to Liverpool. The inspector was clearly very excited.

“We may get a line on the blackmailing part of the business, if on
nothing else,” he declared jubilantly. “He’s a rough customer, this
fellow, by what I heard over the phone. Takes dope, too. We ought to
find it easy to get what we want out of him. If there was the shadow of
a motive, nothing’s more likely than that he killed Mr. Ackroyd. But in
that case, why is young Paton keeping out of the way? The whole thing’s
a muddle—that’s what it is. By the way, M. Poirot, you were quite right
about those fingerprints. They were Mr. Ackroyd’s own. I had rather the
same idea myself, but I dismissed it as hardly feasible.”

I smiled to myself. Inspector Raglan was so very plainly saving his
face.

“As regards this man,” said Poirot, “he is not yet arrested, eh?”

“No, detained under suspicion.”

“And what account does he give of himself?”

“Precious little,” said the inspector, with a grin. “He’s a wary bird,
I gather. A lot of abuse, but very little more.”

On arrival at Liverpool I was surprised to find that Poirot was
welcomed with acclamation. Superintendent Hayes, who met us, had worked
with Poirot over some case long ago, and had evidently an exaggerated
opinion of his powers.

“Now we’ve got M. Poirot here we shan’t be long,” he said cheerfully.
“I thought you’d retired, moosior?”

“So I had, my good Hayes, so I had. But how tedious is retirement! You
cannot imagine to yourself the monotony with which day comes after day.”

“Very likely. So you’ve come to have a look at our own particular find?
Is this Dr. Sheppard? Think you’ll be able to identify him, sir?”

“I’m not very sure,” I said doubtfully.

“How did you get hold of him?” inquired Poirot.

“Description was circulated, as you know. In the press and privately.
Not much to go on, I admit. This fellow has an American accent all
right, and he doesn’t deny that he was near King’s Abbot that night.
Just asks what the hell it is to do with us, and that he’ll see us in
—— before he answers any questions.”

“Is it permitted that I, too, see him?” asked Poirot.

The superintendent closed one eye knowingly.

“Very glad to have you, sir. You’ve got permission to do anything you
please. Inspector Japp of Scotland Yard was asking after you the other
day. Said he’d heard you were connected unofficially with this case.
Where’s Captain Paton hiding, sir, can you tell me that?”

“I doubt if it would be wise at the present juncture,” said Poirot
primly, and I bit my lips to prevent a smile.

The little man really did it very well.

After some further parley, we were taken to interview the prisoner.

He was a young fellow, I should say not more than twenty-two or
three. Tall, thin, with slightly shaking hands, and the evidences of
considerable physical strength somewhat run to seed. His hair was dark,
but his eyes were blue and shifty, seldom meeting a glance squarely. I
had all along cherished the illusion that there was something familiar
about the figure I had met that night, but if this were indeed he, I
was completely mistaken. He did not remind me in the least of any one I
knew.

“Now then, Kent,” said the superintendent, “stand up. Here are some
visitors come to see you. Recognize any of them.”

Kent glared at us sullenly, but did not reply. I saw his glance waver
over the three of us, and come back to rest on me.

“Well, sir,” said the superintendent to me, “what do you say?”

“The height’s the same,” I said, “and as far as general appearance goes
it might well be the man in question. Beyond that, I couldn’t go.”

“What the hell’s the meaning of all this?” asked Kent. “What have you
got against me? Come on, out with it! What am I supposed to have done?”

I nodded my head.

“It’s the man,” I said. “I recognize the voice.”

“Recognize my voice, do you? Where do you think you heard it before?”

“On Friday evening last, outside the gates of Fernly Park. You asked me
the way there.”

“I did, did I?”

“Do you admit it?” asked the inspector.

“I don’t admit anything. Not till I know what you’ve got on me.”

“Have you not read the papers in the last few days?” asked Poirot,
speaking for the first time.

The man’s eyes narrowed.

“So that’s it, is it? I saw an old gent had been croaked at Fernly.
Trying to make out I did the job, are you?”

“You were there that night,” said Poirot quietly.

“How do you know, mister?”

“By this.” Poirot took something from his pocket and held it out.

It was the goose quill we had found in the summer-house.

At the sight of it the man’s face changed. He half held out his hand.

“Snow,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “No, my friend, it is empty. It lay
where you dropped it in the summer-house that night.”

Charles Kent looked at him uncertainly.

“You seem to know a hell of a lot about everything, you little foreign
cock duck. Perhaps you remember this: the papers say that the old gent
was croaked between a quarter to ten and ten o’clock?”

“That is so,” agreed Poirot.

“Yes, but is it really so? That’s what I’m getting at.”

“This gentleman will tell you,” said Poirot.

He indicated Inspector Raglan. The latter hesitated, glanced at
Superintendent Hayes, then at Poirot, and finally, as though receiving
sanction, he said:—

“That’s right. Between a quarter to ten and ten o’clock.”

“Then you’ve nothing to keep me here for,” said Kent. “I was away from
Fernly Park by twenty-five minutes past nine. You can ask at the Dog
and Whistle. That’s a saloon about a mile out of Fernly on the road to
Cranchester. I kicked up a bit of a row there, I remember. As near as
nothing to quarter to ten, it was. How about that?”

Inspector Raglan wrote down something in his notebook.

“Well?” demanded Kent.

“Inquiries will be made,” said the inspector. “If you’ve spoken the
truth, you won’t have anything to complain about. What were you doing
at Fernly Park anyway?”

“Went there to meet some one.”

“Who?”

“That’s none of your business.”

“You’d better keep a civil tongue in your head, my man,” the
superintendent warned him.

“To hell with a civil tongue. I went there on my own business, and
that’s all there is to it. If I was clear away before the murder was
done, that’s all that concerns the cops.”

“Your name, it is Charles Kent,” said Poirot. “Where were you born?”

The man stared at him, then he grinned.

“I’m a full-blown Britisher all right,” he said.

“Yes,” said Poirot meditatively, “I think you are. I fancy you were
born in Kent.”

The man stared.

“Why’s that? Because of my name? What’s that to do with it? Is a man
whose name is Kent bound to be born in that particular county?”

“Under certain circumstances, I can imagine he might be,” said Poirot
very deliberately. “Under certain circumstances, you comprehend.”

There was so much meaning in his voice as to surprise the two police
officers. As for Charles Kent, he flushed a brick red, and for a moment
I thought he was going to spring at Poirot. He thought better of it,
however, and turned away with a kind of laugh.

Poirot nodded as though satisfied, and made his way out through the
door. He was joined presently by the two officers.

“We’ll verify that statement,” remarked Raglan. “I don’t think he’s
lying, though. But he’s got to come clear with a statement as to
what he was doing at Fernly. It looks to me as though we’d got our
blackmailer all right. On the other hand, granted his story’s correct,
he couldn’t have had anything to do with the actual murder. He’d got
ten pounds on him when he was arrested—rather a large sum. I fancy that
forty pounds went to him—the numbers of the notes didn’t correspond,
but of course he’d have changed them first thing. Mr. Ackroyd must
have given him the money, and he made off with it as fast as possible.
What was that about Kent being his birthplace? What’s that got to do
with it?”

“Nothing whatever,” said Poirot mildly. “A little idea of mine, that
was all. Me, I am famous for my little ideas.”

“Are you really?” said Raglan, studying him with a puzzled expression.

The superintendent went into a roar of laughter.

“Many’s the time I’ve heard Inspector Japp say that. M. Poirot and his
little ideas! Too fanciful for me, he’d say, but always something in
them.”

“You mock yourself at me,” said Poirot, smiling; “but never mind. The
old ones they laugh last sometimes, when the young, clever ones do not
laugh at all.”

And nodding his head at them in a sage manner, he walked out into the
street.

He and I lunched together at an hotel. I know now that the whole thing
lay clearly unravelled before him. He had got the last thread he needed
to lead him to the truth.

But at the time I had no suspicion of the fact. I overestimated his
general self-confidence, and I took it for granted that the things
which puzzled me must be equally puzzling to him.

My chief puzzle was what the man Charles Kent could have been doing at
Fernly. Again and again I put the question to myself and could get no
satisfactory reply.

At last I ventured a tentative query to Poirot. His reply was immediate.

“_Mon ami_, I do not think; I know.”

“Really?” I said incredulously.

“Yes, indeed. I suppose now that to you it would not make sense if I
said that he went to Fernly that night because he was born in Kent?”

I stared at him.

“It certainly doesn’t seem to make sense to me,” I said dryly.

“Ah!” said Poirot pityingly. “Well, no matter. I have still my little
idea.”




                              CHAPTER XIX

                             FLORA ACKROYD


As I was returning from my round the following morning, I was hailed by
Inspector Raglan. I pulled up, and the inspector mounted on the step.

“Good-morning, Dr. Sheppard,” he said. “Well, that alibi is all right
enough.”

“Charles Kent’s?”

“Charles Kent’s. The barmaid at the Dog and Whistle, Sally Jones, she
remembers him perfectly. Picked out his photograph from among five
others. It was just a quarter to ten when he came into the bar, and the
Dog and Whistle is well over a mile from Fernly Park. The girl mentions
that he had a lot of money on him—she saw him take a handful of notes
out of his pocket. Rather surprised her, it did, seeing the class of
fellow he was, with a pair of boots clean dropping off him. That’s
where that forty pounds went right enough.”

“The man still refuses to give an account of his visit to Fernly?”

“Obstinate as a mule he is. I had a chat with Hayes at Liverpool over
the wire this morning.”

“Hercule Poirot says he knows the reason the man went there that
night,” I observed.

“Does he?” cried the inspector eagerly.

“Yes,” I said maliciously. “He says he went there because he was born
in Kent.”

I felt a distinct pleasure in passing on my own discomfiture.

Raglan stared at me for a moment or two uncomprehendingly. Then a
grin overspread his weaselly countenance and he tapped his forehead
significantly.

“Bit gone here,” he said. “I’ve thought so for some time. Poor old
chap, so that’s why he had to give up and come down here. In the
family, very likely. He’s got a nephew who’s quite off his crumpet.”

“Poirot has?” I said, very surprised.

“Yes. Hasn’t he ever mentioned him to you? Quite docile, I believe, and
all that, but mad as a hatter, poor lad.”

“Who told you that?”

Again a grin showed itself on Inspector Raglan’s face.

“Your sister, Miss Sheppard, she told me all about it.”

Really, Caroline is amazing. She never rests until she knows the last
details of everybody’s family secrets. Unfortunately, I have never been
able to instill into her the decency of keeping them to herself.

“Jump in, inspector,” I said, opening the door of the car. “We’ll go
up to The Larches together, and acquaint our Belgian friend with the
latest news.”

“Might as well, I suppose. After all, even if he is a bit balmy, it was
a useful tip he gave me about those fingerprints. He’s got a bee in his
bonnet about the man Kent, but who knows—there may be something useful
behind it.”

Poirot received us with his usual smiling courtesy.

He listened to the information we had brought him, nodding his head now
and then.

“Seems quite O.K., doesn’t it?” said the inspector rather gloomily. “A
chap can’t be murdering some one in one place when he’s drinking in the
bar in another place a mile away.”

“Are you going to release him?”

“Don’t see what else we can do. We can’t very well hold him for
obtaining money on false pretences. Can’t prove a ruddy thing.”

The inspector tossed a match into the grate in a disgruntled fashion.
Poirot retrieved it and put it neatly in a little receptacle designed
for the purpose. His action was purely mechanical. I could see that his
thoughts were on something very different.

“If I were you,” he said at last, “I should not release the man Charles
Kent yet.”

“What do you mean?”

Raglan stared at him.

“What I say. I should not release him yet.”

“You don’t think he can have had anything to do with the murder, do
you?”

“I think probably not—but one cannot be certain yet.”

“But haven’t I just told you——”

Poirot raised a hand protestingly.

“_Mais oui, mais oui._ I heard. I am not deaf—nor stupid, thank the
good God! But see you, you approach the matter from the wrong—the
wrong—premises, is not that the word?”

The inspector stared at him heavily.

“I don’t see how you make that out. Look here, we know Mr. Ackroyd was
alive at a quarter to ten. You admit that, don’t you?”

Poirot looked at him for a moment, then shook his head with a quick
smile.

“I admit nothing that is not—_proved_!”

“Well, we’ve got proof enough of that. We’ve got Miss Flora Ackroyd’s
evidence.”

“That she said good-night to her uncle? But me—I do not always believe
what a young lady tells me—no, not even when she is charming and
beautiful.”

“But hang it all, man, Parker saw her coming out of the door.”

“No.” Poirot’s voice rang out with sudden sharpness. “That is just what
he did not see. I satisfied myself of that by a little experiment the
other day—you remember, doctor? Parker saw her _outside_ the door, with
her hand on the handle. He did not see her come out of the room.”

“But—where else could she have been?”

“Perhaps on the stairs.”

“The stairs?”

“That is my little idea—yes.”

“But those stairs only lead to Mr. Ackroyd’s bedroom.”

“Precisely.”

And still the inspector stared.

“You think she’d been up to her uncle’s bedroom? Well, why not? Why
should she lie about it?”

“Ah! that is just the question. It depends on what she was doing there,
does it not?”

“You mean—the money? Hang it all, you don’t suggest that it was Miss
Ackroyd who took that forty pounds?”

“I suggest nothing,” said Poirot. “But I will remind you of this. Life
was not very easy for that mother and daughter. There were bills—there
was constant trouble over small sums of money. Roger Ackroyd was a
peculiar man over money matters. The girl might be at her wit’s end for
a comparatively small sum. Figure to yourself then what happens. She
has taken the money, she descends the little staircase. When she is
half-way down she hears the chink of glass from the hall. She has not a
doubt of what it is—Parker coming to the study. At all costs she must
not be found on the stairs—Parker will not forget it, he will think it
odd. If the money is missed, Parker is sure to remember having seen her
come down those stairs. She has just time to rush down to the study
door—with her hand on the handle to show that she has just come out,
when Parker appears in the doorway. She says the first thing that comes
into her head, a repetition of Roger Ackroyd’s orders earlier in the
evening, and then goes upstairs to her own room.”

“Yes, but later,” persisted the inspector, “she must have realized the
vital importance of speaking the truth? Why, the whole case hinges on
it!”

“Afterwards,” said Poirot dryly, “it was a little difficult for
Mademoiselle Flora. She is told simply that the police are here and
that there has been a robbery. Naturally she jumps to the conclusion
that the theft of the money has been discovered. Her one idea is to
stick to her story. When she learns that her uncle is dead she is
panic-stricken. Young women do not faint nowadays, monsieur, without
considerable provocation. _Eh bien!_ there it is. She is bound to stick
to her story, or else confess everything. And a young and pretty girl
does not like to admit that she is a thief—especially before those
whose esteem she is anxious to retain.”

Raglan brought his fist down with a thump on the table.

“I’ll not believe it,” he said. “It’s—it’s not credible. And you—you’ve
known this all along?”

“The possibility has been in my mind from the first,” admitted Poirot.
“I was always convinced that Mademoiselle Flora was hiding something
from us. To satisfy myself, I made the little experiment I told you of.
Dr. Sheppard accompanied me.”

“A test for Parker, you said it was,” I remarked bitterly.

“_Mon ami_,” said Poirot apologetically, “as I told you at the time,
one must say something.”

The inspector rose.

“There’s only one thing for it,” he declared. “We must tackle the young
lady right away. You’ll come up to Fernly with me, M. Poirot?”

“Certainly. Dr. Sheppard will drive us up in his car.”

I acquiesced willingly.

On inquiry for Miss Ackroyd, we were shown into the billiard room.
Flora and Major Hector Blunt were sitting on the long window seat.

“Good-morning, Miss Ackroyd,” said the inspector. “Can we have a word
or two alone with you?”

Blunt got up at once and moved to the door.

“What is it?” asked Flora nervously. “Don’t go, Major Blunt. He can
stay, can’t he?” she asked, turning to the inspector.

“That’s as you like,” said the inspector dryly. “There’s a question
or two it’s my duty to put to you, miss, but I’d prefer to do so
privately, and I dare say you’d prefer it also.”

Flora looked keenly at him. I saw her face grow whiter. Then she turned
and spoke to Blunt.

“I want you to stay—please—yes, I mean it. Whatever the inspector has
to say to me, I’d rather you heard it.”

Raglan shrugged his shoulders.

“Well, if you will have it so, that’s all there is to it. Now, Miss
Ackroyd, M. Poirot here has made a certain suggestion to me. He
suggests that you weren’t in the study at all last Friday night, that
you never saw Mr. Ackroyd to say good-night to him, that instead of
being in the study you were on the stairs leading down from your
uncle’s bedroom when you heard Parker coming across the hall.”

Flora’s gaze shifted to Poirot. He nodded back at her.

“Mademoiselle, the other day, when we sat round the table, I implored
you to be frank with me. What one does not tell to Papa Poirot he finds
out. It was that, was it not? See, I will make it easy for you. You
took the money, did you not?”

“The money,” said Blunt sharply.

There was a silence which lasted for at least a minute.

Then Flora drew herself up and spoke.

“M. Poirot is right. I took that money. I stole. I am a thief—yes, a
common, vulgar little thief. Now you know! I am glad it has come out.
It’s been a nightmare, these last few days!” She sat down suddenly and
buried her face in her hands. She spoke huskily through her fingers.
“You don’t know what my life has been since I came here. Wanting
things, scheming for them, lying, cheating, running up bills, promising
to pay—oh! I hate myself when I think of it all! That’s what brought us
together, Ralph and I. We were both weak! I understood him, and I was
sorry—because I’m the same underneath. We’re not strong enough to stand
alone, either of us. We’re weak, miserable, despicable things.”

She looked at Blunt and suddenly stamped her foot.

“Why do you look at me like that—as though you couldn’t believe? I may
be a thief—but at any rate I’m real now. I’m not lying any more. I’m
not pretending to be the kind of girl you like, young and innocent and
simple. I don’t care if you never want to see me again. I hate myself,
despise myself—but you’ve got to believe one thing, if speaking the
truth would have made things better for Ralph, I would have spoken out.
But I’ve seen all along that it wouldn’t be better for Ralph—it makes
the case against him blacker than ever. I was not doing him any harm by
sticking to my lie.”

“Ralph,” said Blunt. “I see—always Ralph.”

“You don’t understand,” said Flora hopelessly. “You never will.”

She turned to the inspector.

“I admit everything; I was at my wit’s end for money. I never saw my
uncle that evening after he left the dinner-table. As to the money, you
can take what steps you please. Nothing could be worse than it is now!”

Suddenly she broke down again, hid her face in her hands, and rushed
from the room.

“Well,” said the inspector in a flat tone, “so that’s that.”

He seemed rather at a loss what to do next.

Blunt came forward.

“Inspector Raglan,” he said quietly, “that money was given to me by Mr.
Ackroyd for a special purpose. Miss Ackroyd never touched it. When she
says she did, she is lying with the idea of shielding Captain Paton.
The truth is as I said, and I am prepared to go into the witness box
and swear to it.”

He made a kind of jerky bow, then turning abruptly, he left the room.

Poirot was after him in a flash. He caught the other up in the hall.

“Monsieur—a moment, I beg of you, if you will be so good.”

“Well, sir?”

Blunt was obviously impatient. He stood frowning down on Poirot.

“It is this,” said Poirot rapidly: “I am not deceived by your little
fantasy. No, indeed. It was truly Miss Flora who took the money. All
the same it is well imagined what you say—it pleases me. It is very
good what you have done there. You are a man quick to think and to act.”

“I’m not in the least anxious for your opinion, thank you,” said Blunt
coldly.

He made once more as though to pass on, but Poirot, not at all
offended, laid a detaining hand on his arm.

“Ah! but you are to listen to me. I have more to say. The other day I
spoke of concealments. Very well, all along have I seen what you are
concealing. Mademoiselle Flora, you love her with all your heart. From
the first moment you saw her, is it not so? Oh! let us not mind saying
these things—why must one in England think it necessary to mention
love as though it were some disgraceful secret? You love Mademoiselle
Flora. You seek to conceal that fact from all the world. That is very
good—that is as it should be. But take the advice of Hercule Poirot—do
not conceal it from mademoiselle herself.”

Blunt had shown several signs of restlessness whilst Poirot was
speaking, but the closing words seemed to rivet his attention.

“What d’you mean by that?” he said sharply.

“You think that she loves the Capitaine Ralph Paton—but I, Hercule
Poirot, tell you that that is not so. Mademoiselle Flora accepted
Captain Paton to please her uncle, and because she saw in the marriage
a way of escape from her life here which was becoming frankly
insupportable to her. She liked him, and there was much sympathy
and understanding between them. But love—no! It is not Captain Paton
Mademoiselle Flora loves.”

“What the devil do you mean?” asked Blunt.

I saw the dark flush under his tan.

“You have been blind, monsieur. Blind! She is loyal, the little one.
Ralph Paton is under a cloud, she is bound in honor to stick by him.”

I felt it was time I put in a word to help on the good work.

“My sister told me the other night,” I said encouragingly, “that Flora
had never cared a penny piece for Ralph Paton, and never would. My
sister is always right about these things.”

Blunt ignored my well-meant efforts. He spoke to Poirot.

“D’you really think——” he began, and stopped.

He is one of those inarticulate men who find it hard to put things into
words.

Poirot knows no such disability.

“If you doubt me, ask her yourself, monsieur. But perhaps you no longer
care to—the affair of the money——”

Blunt gave a sound like an angry laugh.

“Think I’d hold that against her? Roger was always a queer chap about
money. She got in a mess and didn’t dare tell him. Poor kid. Poor
lonely kid.”

Poirot looked thoughtfully at the side door.

“Mademoiselle Flora went into the garden, I think,” he murmured.

“I’ve been every kind of a fool,” said Blunt abruptly. “Rum
conversation we’ve been having. Like one of those Danish plays. But
you’re a sound fellow, M. Poirot. Thank you.”

He took Poirot’s hand and gave it a grip which caused the other to
wince in anguish. Then he strode to the side door and passed out into
the garden.

“Not every kind of a fool,” murmured Poirot, tenderly nursing the
injured member. “Only one kind—the fool in love.”




                              CHAPTER XX

                             MISS RUSSELL


Inspector Raglan had received a bad jolt. He was not deceived by
Blunt’s valiant lie any more than we had been. Our way back to the
village was punctuated by his complaints.

“This alters everything, this does. I don’t know whether you’ve
realized it, Monsieur Poirot?”

“I think so, yes, I think so,” said Poirot. “You see, me, I have been
familiar with the idea for some time.”

Inspector Raglan, who had only had the idea presented to him a short
half-hour ago, looked at Poirot unhappily, and went on with his
discoveries.

“Those alibis now. Worthless! Absolutely worthless. Got to start
again. Find out what every one was doing from nine-thirty onwards.
Nine-thirty—that’s the time we’ve got to hang on to. You were quite
right about the man Kent—we don’t release _him_ yet awhile. Let me see
now—nine-forty-five at the Dog and Whistle. He might have got there
in a quarter of an hour if he ran. It’s just possible that it was
_his_ voice Mr. Raymond heard talking to Mr. Ackroyd—asking for money
which Mr. Ackroyd refused. But one thing’s clear—it wasn’t he who
sent the telephone message. The station is half a mile in the other
direction—over a mile and a half from the Dog and Whistle, and he was
at the Dog and Whistle until about ten minutes past ten. Dang that
telephone call! We always come up against it.”

“We do indeed,” agreed Poirot. “It is curious.”

“It’s just possible that if Captain Paton climbed into his uncle’s room
and found him there murdered, _he_ may have sent it. Got the wind up,
thought he’d be accused, and cleared out. That’s possible, isn’t it?”

“Why should he have telephoned?”

“May have had doubts if the old man was really dead. Thought he’d
get the doctor up there as soon as possible, but didn’t want to give
himself away. Yes, I say now, how’s that for a theory? Something in
that, I should say.”

The inspector swelled his chest out importantly. He was so plainly
delighted with himself that any words of ours would have been quite
superfluous.

We arrived back at my house at this minute, and I hurried in to my
surgery patients, who had all been waiting a considerable time, leaving
Poirot to walk to the police station with the inspector.

Having dismissed the last patient, I strolled into the little room at
the back of the house which I call my workshop—I am rather proud of the
home-made wireless set I turned out. Caroline hates my workroom. I keep
my tools there, and Annie is not allowed to wreak havoc with a dustpan
and brush. I was just adjusting the interior of an alarm clock which
had been denounced as wholly unreliable by the household, when the door
opened and Caroline put her head in.

“Oh! there you are, James,” she said, with deep disapproval. “M. Poirot
wants to see you.”

“Well,” I said, rather irritably, for her sudden entrance had startled
me and I had let go of a piece of delicate mechanism, “if he wants to
see me, he can come in here.”

“In here?” said Caroline.

“That’s what I said—in here.”

Caroline gave a sniff of disapproval and retired. She returned in a
moment or two, ushering in Poirot, and then retired again, shutting the
door with a bang.

“Aha! my friend,” said Poirot, coming forward and rubbing his hands.
“You have not got rid of me so easily, you see!”

“Finished with the inspector?” I asked.

“For the moment, yes. And you, you have seen all the patients?”

“Yes.”

Poirot sat down and looked at me, tilting his egg-shaped head on one
side, with the air of one who savors a very delicious joke.

“You are in error,” he said at last. “You have still one patient to
see.”

“Not you?” I exclaimed in surprise.

“Ah, not me, _bien entendu_. Me, I have the health magnificent. No, to
tell you the truth, it is a little _complot_ of mine. There is some one
I wish to see, you understand—and at the same time it is not necessary
that the whole village should intrigue itself about the matter—which is
what would happen if the lady were seen to come to my house—for it is
a lady. But to you she has already come as a patient before.”

“Miss Russell!” I exclaimed.

“_Précisément._ I wish much to speak with her, so I send her the little
note and make the appointment in your surgery. You are not annoyed with
me?”

“On the contrary,” I said. “That is, presuming I am allowed to be
present at the interview?”

“But naturally! In your own surgery!”

“You know,” I said, throwing down the pincers I was holding, “it’s
extraordinarily intriguing, the whole thing. Every new development that
arises is like the shake you give to a kaleidoscope—the thing changes
entirely in aspect. Now, why are you so anxious to see Miss Russell?”

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

“Surely it is obvious?” he murmured.

“There you go again,” I grumbled. “According to you everything is
obvious. But you leave me walking about in a fog.”

Poirot shook his head genially at me.

“You mock yourself at me. Take the matter of Mademoiselle Flora. The
inspector was surprised—but you—you were not.”

“I never dreamed of her being the thief,” I expostulated.

“That—perhaps no. But I was watching your face and you were not—like
Inspector Raglan—startled and incredulous.”

I thought for a minute or two.

“Perhaps you are right,” I said at last. “All along I’ve felt that
Flora was keeping back something—so the truth, when it came, was
subconsciously expected. It upset Inspector Raglan very much indeed,
poor man.”

“Ah! _pour ça, oui_! The poor man must rearrange all his ideas. I
profited by his state of mental chaos to induce him to grant me a
little favor.”

“What was that?”

Poirot took a sheet of notepaper from his pocket. Some words were
written on it, and he read them aloud.

“The police have, for some days, been seeking for Captain Ralph Paton,
the nephew of Mr. Ackroyd of Fernly Park, whose death occurred under
such tragic circumstances last Friday. Captain Paton has been found at
Liverpool, where he was on the point of embarking for America.”

He folded up the piece of paper again.

“That, my friend, will be in the newspapers to-morrow morning.”

I stared at him, dumbfounded.

“But—but it isn’t true! He’s not at Liverpool!”

Poirot beamed on me.

“You have the intelligence so quick! No, he has not been found at
Liverpool. Inspector Raglan was very loath to let me send this
paragraph to the press, especially as I could not take him into my
confidence. But I assured him most solemnly that very interesting
results would follow its appearance in print, so he gave in, after
stipulating that he was, on no account, to bear the responsibility.”

I stared at Poirot. He smiled back at me.

“It beats me,” I said at last, “what you expect to get out of that.”

“You should employ your little gray cells,” said Poirot gravely.

He rose and came across to the bench.

“It is that you have really the love of the machinery,” he said, after
inspecting the débris of my labors.

Every man has his hobby. I immediately drew Poirot’s attention to my
home-made wireless. Finding him sympathetic, I showed him one or two
little inventions of my own—trifling things, but useful in the house.

“Decidedly,” said Poirot, “you should be an inventor by trade, not a
doctor. But I hear the bell—that is your patient. Let us go into the
surgery.”

Once before I had been struck by the remnants of beauty in the
housekeeper’s face. This morning I was struck anew. Very simply dressed
in black, tall, upright and independent as ever, with her big dark eyes
and an unwonted flush of color in her usually pale cheeks, I realized
that as a girl she must have been startlingly handsome.

“Good-morning, mademoiselle,” said Poirot. “Will you be seated? Dr.
Sheppard is so kind as to permit me the use of his surgery for a little
conversation I am anxious to have with you.”

Miss Russell sat down with her usual composure. If she felt any inward
agitation, it did not display itself in any outward manifestation.

“It seems a queer way of doing things, if you’ll allow me to say so,”
she remarked.

“Miss Russell—I have news to give you.”

“Indeed!”

“Charles Kent has been arrested at Liverpool.”

Not a muscle of her face moved. She merely opened her eyes a trifle
wider, and asked, with a tinge of defiance:

“Well, what of it?”

But at that moment it came to me—the resemblance that had haunted me
all along, something familiar in the defiance of Charles Kent’s manner.
The two voices, one rough and coarse, the other painfully ladylike—were
strangely the same in timbre. It was of Miss Russell that I had been
reminded that night outside the gates of Fernly Park.

I looked at Poirot, full of my discovery, and he gave me an
imperceptible nod.

In answer to Miss Russell’s question, he threw out his hands in a
thoroughly French gesture.

“I thought you might be interested, that is all,” he said mildly.

“Well, I’m not particularly,” said Miss Russell. “Who is this Charles
Kent anyway?”

“He is a man, mademoiselle, who was at Fernly on the night of the
murder.”

“Really?”

“Fortunately for him, he has an alibi. At a quarter to ten he was at a
public-house a mile from here.”

“Lucky for him,” commented Miss Russell.

“But we still do not know what he was doing at Fernly—who it was he
went to meet, for instance.”

“I’m afraid I can’t help you at all,” said the housekeeper politely.
“Nothing came to _my_ ears. If that is all——”

She made a tentative movement as though to rise. Poirot stopped her.

“It is not quite all,” he said smoothly. “This morning fresh
developments have arisen. It seems now that Mr. Ackroyd was murdered,
not at a quarter to ten, but _before_. Between ten minutes to nine,
when Dr. Sheppard left, and a quarter to ten.”

I saw the color drain from the housekeeper’s face, leaving it dead
white. She leaned forward, her figure swaying.

“But Miss Ackroyd said—Miss Ackroyd said——”

“Miss Ackroyd has admitted that she was lying. She was never in the
study at all that evening.”

“Then——?”

“Then it would seem that in this Charles Kent we have the man we are
looking for. He came to Fernly, can give no account of what he was
doing there——”

“I can tell you what he was doing there. He never touched a hair of old
Ackroyd’s head—he never went near the study. He didn’t do it, I tell
you.”

She was leaning forward. That iron self-control was broken through at
last. Terror and desperation were in her face.

“M. Poirot! M. Poirot! Oh, do believe me.”

Poirot got up and came to her. He patted her reassuringly on the
shoulder.

“But yes—but yes, I will believe. I had to make you speak, you know.”

For an instant suspicion flared up in her.

“Is what you said true?”

“That Charles Kent is suspected of the crime? Yes, that is true. You
alone can save him, by telling the reason for his being at Fernly.”

“He came to see me.” She spoke in a low, hurried voice. “I went out to
meet him——”

“In the summer-house, yes, I know.”

“How do you know?”

“Mademoiselle, it is the business of Hercule Poirot to know things. I
know that you went out earlier in the evening, that you left a message
in the summer-house to say what time you would be there.”

“Yes, I did. I had heard from him—saying he was coming. I dared not
let him come to the house. I wrote to the address he gave me and said
I would meet him in the summer-house, and described it to him so that
he would be able to find it. Then I was afraid he might not wait there
patiently, and I ran out and left a piece of paper to say I would be
there about ten minutes past nine. I didn’t want the servants to see
me, so I slipped out through the drawing-room window. As I came back, I
met Dr. Sheppard, and I fancied that he would think it queer. I was out
of breath, for I had been running. I had no idea that he was expected
to dinner that night.”

She paused.

“Go on,” said Poirot. “You went out to meet him at ten minutes past
nine. What did you say to each other?”

“It’s difficult. You see——”

“Mademoiselle,” said Poirot, interrupting her, “in this matter I must
have the whole truth. What you tell us need never go beyond these four
walls. Dr. Sheppard will be discreet, and so shall I. See, I will help
you. This Charles Kent, he is your son, is he not?”

She nodded. The color had flamed into her cheeks.

“No one has ever known. It was long ago—long ago—down in Kent. I was
not married....”

“So you took the name of the county as a surname for him. I understand.”

“I got work. I managed to pay for his board and lodging. I never told
him that I was his mother. But he turned out badly, he drank, then took
to drugs. I managed to pay his passage out to Canada. I didn’t hear of
him for a year or two. Then, somehow or other, he found out that I was
his mother. He wrote asking me for money. Finally, I heard from him
back in this country again. He was coming to see me at Fernly, he said.
I dared not let him come to the house. I have always been considered
so—so very respectable. If any one got an inkling—it would have been
all up with my post as housekeeper. So I wrote to him in the way I have
just told you.”

“And in the morning you came to see Dr. Sheppard?”

“Yes. I wondered if something could be done. He was not a bad
boy—before he took to drugs.”

“I see,” said Poirot. “Now let us go on with the story. He came that
night to the summer-house?”

“Yes, he was waiting for me when I got there. He was very rough and
abusive. I had brought with me all the money I had, and I gave it to
him. We talked a little, and then he went away.”

“What time was that?”

“It must have been between twenty and twenty-five minutes past nine. It
was not yet half-past when I got back to the house.”

“Which way did he go?”

“Straight out the same way he came, by the path that joined the drive
just inside the lodge gates.”

Poirot nodded.

“And you, what did you do?”

“I went back to the house. Major Blunt was walking up and down the
terrace smoking, so I made a detour to get round to the side door. It
was then just on half-past nine, as I tell you.”

Poirot nodded again. He made a note or two in a microscopic pocket-book.

“I think that is all,” he said thoughtfully.

“Ought I——” she hesitated. “Ought I to tell all this to Inspector
Raglan?”

“It may come to that. But let us not be in a hurry. Let us proceed
slowly, with due order and method. Charles Kent is not yet formally
charged with murder. Circumstances may arise which will render your
story unnecessary.”

Miss Russell rose.

“Thank you very much, M. Poirot,” she said. “You have been very
kind—very kind indeed. You—you do believe me, don’t you? That Charles
had nothing to do with this wicked murder!”

“There seems no doubt that the man who was talking to Mr. Ackroyd in
the library at nine-thirty could not possibly have been your son. Be of
good courage, mademoiselle. All will yet be well.”

Miss Russell departed. Poirot and I were left together.

“So that’s that,” I said. “Every time we come back to Ralph Paton. How
did you manage to spot Miss Russell as the person Charles Kent came to
meet? Did you notice the resemblance?”

“I had connected her with the unknown man long before we actually
came face to face with him. As soon as we found that quill. The quill
suggested dope, and I remembered your account of Miss Russell’s visit
to you. Then I found the article on cocaine in that morning’s paper. It
all seemed very clear. She had heard from some one that morning—some
one addicted to drugs, she read the article in the paper, and she came
to you to ask a few tentative questions. She mentioned cocaine, since
the article in question was on cocaine. Then, when you seemed too
interested, she switched hurriedly to the subject of detective stories
and untraceable poisons. I suspected a son or a brother, or some other
undesirable male relation. Ah! but I must go. It is the time of the
lunch.”

“Stay and lunch with us,” I suggested.

Poirot shook his head. A faint twinkle came into his eye.

“Not again to-day. I should not like to force Mademoiselle Caroline to
adopt a vegetarian diet two days in succession.”

It occurred to me that there was not much which escaped Hercule Poirot.




                              CHAPTER XXI

                      THE PARAGRAPH IN THE PAPER


Caroline, of course, had not failed to see Miss Russell come
to the surgery door. I had anticipated this, and had ready an
elaborate account of the lady’s bad knee. But Caroline was not in a
cross-questioning mood. Her point of view was that she knew what Miss
Russell had really come for and that _I_ didn’t.

“Pumping you, James,” said Caroline. “Pumping you in the most shameless
manner, I’ve not a doubt. It’s no good interrupting. I dare say you
hadn’t the least idea she was doing it even. Men _are_ so simple. She
knows that you are in M. Poirot’s confidence, and she wants to find out
things. Do you know what I think, James?”

“I couldn’t begin to imagine. You think so many extraordinary things.”

“It’s no good being sarcastic. I think Miss Russell knows more about
Mr. Ackroyd’s death than she is prepared to admit.”

Caroline leaned back triumphantly in her chair.

“Do you really think so?” I said absently.

“You are very dull to-day, James. No animation about you. It’s that
liver of yours.”

Our conversation then dealt with purely personal matters.

The paragraph inspired by Poirot duly appeared in our daily paper the
next morning. I was in the dark as to its purpose, but its effect on
Caroline was immense.

She began by stating, most untruly, that she had said as much all
along. I raised my eyebrows, but did not argue. Caroline, however, must
have felt a prick of conscience, for she went on:—

“I mayn’t have actually mentioned Liverpool, but I knew he’d try to get
away to America. That’s what Crippen did.”

“Without much success,” I reminded her.

“Poor boy, and so they’ve caught him. I consider, James, that it’s your
duty to see that he isn’t hung.”

“What do you expect me to do?”

“Why, you’re a medical man, aren’t you? You’ve known him from a boy
upwards. Not mentally responsible. That’s the line to take, clearly. I
read only the other day that they’re very happy in Broadmoor—it’s quite
like a high-class club.”

But Caroline’s words had reminded me of something.

“I never knew that Poirot had an imbecile nephew?” I said curiously.

“Didn’t you? Oh, he told me all about it. Poor lad. It’s a great grief
to all the family. They’ve kept him at home so far, but it’s getting
to such a pitch that they’re afraid he’ll have to go into some kind of
institution.”

“I suppose you know pretty well everything there is to know about
Poirot’s family by this time,” I said, exasperated.

“Pretty well,” said Caroline complacently. “It’s a great relief to
people to be able to tell all their troubles to some one.”

“It might be,” I said, “if they were ever allowed to do so
spontaneously. Whether they enjoy having confidences screwed out of
them by force is another matter.”

Caroline merely looked at me with the air of a Christian martyr
enjoying martyrdom.

“You are so self-contained, James,” she said. “You hate speaking out,
or parting with any information yourself, and you think everybody else
must be just like you. I should hope that I never screw confidences out
of anybody. For instance, if M. Poirot comes in this afternoon, as he
said he might do, I shall not dream of asking him who it was arrived at
his house early this morning.”

“Early this morning?” I queried.

“Very early,” said Caroline. “Before the milk came. I just happened
to be looking out of the window—the blind was flapping. It was a man.
He came in a closed car, and he was all muffled up. I couldn’t get a
glimpse of his face. But I will tell you _my_ idea, and you’ll see that
I’m right.”

“What’s your idea?”

Caroline dropped her voice mysteriously.

“A Home Office expert,” she breathed.

“A Home Office expert,” I said, amazed. “My dear Caroline!”

“Mark my words, James, you’ll see that I’m right. That Russell woman
was here that morning after your poisons. Roger Ackroyd might easily
have been poisoned in his food that night.”

I laughed out loud.

“Nonsense,” I cried. “He was stabbed in the neck. You know that as well
as I do.”

“After death, James,” said Caroline; “to make a false clew.”

“My good woman,” I said, “I examined the body, and I know what I’m
talking about. That wound wasn’t inflicted after death—it was the cause
of death, and you need make no mistake about it.”

Caroline merely continued to look omniscient, which so annoyed me that
I went on:—

“Perhaps you will tell me, Caroline, if I have a medical degree or if I
have not?”

“You have the medical degree, I dare say, James—at least, I mean I know
you have. But you’ve no imagination whatever.”

“Having endowed you with a treble portion, there was none left over for
me,” I said dryly.

I was amused to notice Caroline’s maneuvers that afternoon when Poirot
duly arrived. My sister, without asking a direct question, skirted the
subject of the mysterious guest in every way imaginable. By the twinkle
in Poirot’s eyes, I saw that he realized her object. He remained
blandly impervious, and blocked her bowling so successfully that she
herself was at a loss how to proceed.

Having, I suspect, quietly enjoyed the little game, he rose to his feet
and suggested a walk.

“It is that I need to reduce the figure a little,” he explained. “You
will come with me, doctor? And perhaps later Miss Caroline will give us
some tea.”

“Delighted,” said Caroline. “Won’t your—er—guest come in also?”

“You are too kind,” said Poirot. “But no, my friend reposes himself.
Soon you must make his acquaintance.”

“Quite an old friend of yours, so somebody told me,” said Caroline,
making one last valiant effort.

“Did they?” murmured Poirot. “Well, we must start.”

Our tramp took us in the direction of Fernly. I had guessed beforehand
that it might do so. I was beginning to understand Poirot’s methods.
Every little irrelevancy had a bearing upon the whole.

“I have a commission for you, my friend,” he said at last. “To-night,
at my house, I desire to have a little conference. You will attend,
will you not?”

“Certainly,” I said.

“Good. I need also all those in the house—that is to say: Mrs. Ackroyd,
Mademoiselle Flora, Major Blunt, M. Raymond. I want you to be my
ambassador. This little reunion is fixed for nine o’clock. You will ask
them—yes?”

“With pleasure; but why not ask them yourself?”

“Because they will then put the questions: Why? What for? They will
demand what my idea is. And, as you know, my friend, I much dislike to
have to explain my little ideas until the time comes.”

I smiled a little.

“My friend Hastings, he of whom I told you, used to say of me that I
was the human oyster. But he was unjust. Of facts, I keep nothing to
myself. But to every one his own interpretation of them.”

“When do you want me to do this?”

“Now, if you will. We are close to the house.”

“Aren’t you coming in?”

“No, me, I will promenade myself in the grounds. I will rejoin you by
the lodge gates in a quarter of an hour’s time.”

I nodded, and set off on my task. The only member of the family at home
proved to be Mrs. Ackroyd, who was sipping an early cup of tea. She
received me very graciously.

“So grateful to you, doctor,” she murmured, “for clearing up that
little matter with M. Poirot. But life is one trouble after another.
You have heard about Flora, of course?”

“What exactly?” I asked cautiously.

“This new engagement. Flora and Hector Blunt. Of course not such a good
match as Ralph would have been. But after all, happiness comes first.
What dear Flora needs is an older man—some one steady and reliable, and
then Hector is really a very distinguished man in his way. You saw the
news of Ralph’s arrest in the paper this morning?”

“Yes,” I said, “I did.”

“Horrible.” Mrs. Ackroyd closed her eyes and shuddered. “Geoffrey
Raymond was in a terrible way. Rang up Liverpool. But they wouldn’t
tell him anything at the police station there. In fact, they said
they hadn’t arrested Ralph at all. Mr. Raymond insists that it’s all
a mistake—a—what do they call it?—_canard_ of the newspaper’s. I’ve
forbidden it to be mentioned before the servants. Such a terrible
disgrace. Fancy if Flora had actually been married to him.”

Mrs. Ackroyd shut her eyes in anguish. I began to wonder how soon I
should be able to deliver Poirot’s invitation.

Before I had time to speak, Mrs. Ackroyd was off again.

“You were here yesterday, weren’t you, with that dreadful Inspector
Raglan? Brute of a man—he terrified Flora into saying she took that
money from poor Roger’s room. And the matter was so simple, really. The
dear child wanted to borrow a few pounds, didn’t like to disturb her
uncle since he’d given strict orders against it, but knowing where he
kept his notes she went there and took what she needed.”

“Is that Flora’s account of the matter?” I asked.

“My dear doctor, you know what girls are nowadays. So easily acted on
by suggestion. You, of course, know all about hypnosis and that sort of
thing. The inspector shouts at her, says the word ‘steal’ over and over
again, until the poor child gets an inhibition—or is it a complex?—I
always mix up those two words—and actually thinks herself that she has
stolen the money. I saw at once how it was. But I can’t be too thankful
for the whole misunderstanding in one way—it seems to have brought
those two together—Hector and Flora, I mean. And I assure you that I
have been very much worried about Flora in the past: why, at one time
I actually thought there was going to be some kind of understanding
between her and young Raymond. Just think of it!” Mrs. Ackroyd’s voice
rose in shrill horror. “A private secretary—with practically no means
of his own.”

“It would have been a severe blow to you,” I said. “Now, Mrs. Ackroyd,
I’ve got a message for you from M. Hercule Poirot.”

“For me?”

Mrs. Ackroyd looked quite alarmed.

I hastened to reassure her, and I explained what Poirot wanted.

“Certainly,” said Mrs. Ackroyd rather doubtfully, “I suppose we must
come if M. Poirot says so. But what is it all about? I like to know
beforehand.”

I assured the lady truthfully that I myself did not know any more than
she did.

“Very well,” said Mrs. Ackroyd at last, rather grudgingly, “I will tell
the others, and we will be there at nine o’clock.”

Thereupon I took my leave, and joined Poirot at the agreed
meeting-place.

“I’ve been longer than a quarter of an hour, I’m afraid,” I remarked.
“But once that good lady starts talking it’s a matter of the utmost
difficulty to get a word in edgeways.”

“It is of no matter,” said Poirot. “Me, I have been well amused. This
park is magnificent.”

We set off homewards. When we arrived, to our great surprise Caroline,
who had evidently been watching for us, herself opened the door.

She put her fingers to her lips. Her face was full of importance and
excitement.

“Ursula Bourne,” she said, “the parlormaid from Fernly. She’s here!
I’ve put her in the dining-room. She’s in a terrible way, poor thing.
Says she must see M. Poirot at once. I’ve done all I could. Taken her a
cup of hot tea. It really goes to one’s heart to see any one in such a
state.”

“In the dining-room?” asked Poirot.

“This way,” I said, and flung open the door.

Ursula Bourne was sitting by the table. Her arms were spread out in
front of her, and she had evidently just lifted her head from where it
had been buried. Her eyes were red with weeping.

“Ursula Bourne,” I murmured.

But Poirot went past me with outstretched hands.

“No,” he said, “that is not quite right, I think. It is not Ursula
Bourne, is it, my child—but Ursula Paton? Mrs. Ralph Paton.”




                             CHAPTER XXII

                            URSULA’S STORY


For a moment or two the girl looked mutely at Poirot. Then, her reserve
breaking down completely, she nodded her head once, and burst into an
outburst of sobs.

Caroline pushed past me, and putting her arm round the girl, patted her
on the shoulder.

“There, there, my dear,” she said soothingly, “it will be all right.
You’ll see—everything will be all right.”

Buried under curiosity and scandal-mongering there is a lot of kindness
in Caroline. For the moment, even the interest of Poirot’s revelation
was lost in the sight of the girl’s distress.

Presently Ursula sat up and wiped her eyes.

“This is very weak and silly of me,” she said.

“No, no, my child,” said Poirot kindly. “We can all realize the strain
of this last week.”

“It must have been a terrible ordeal,” I said.

“And then to find that you knew,” continued Ursula. “How did you know?
Was it Ralph who told you?”

Poirot shook his head.

“You know what brought me to you to-night,” went on the girl. “_This_——”

She held out a crumpled piece of newspaper, and I recognized the
paragraph that Poirot had had inserted.

“It says that Ralph has been arrested. So everything is useless. I need
not pretend any longer.”

“Newspaper paragraphs are not always true, mademoiselle,” murmured
Poirot, having the grace to look ashamed of himself. “All the same, I
think you will do well to make a clean breast of things. The truth is
what we need now.”

The girl hesitated, looking at him doubtfully.

“You do not trust me,” said Poirot gently. “Yet all the same you came
here to find me, did you not? Why was that?”

“Because I don’t believe that Ralph did it,” said the girl in a very
low voice. “And I think that you are clever, and will find out the
truth. And also——”

“Yes?”

“I think you are kind.”

Poirot nodded his head several times.

“It is very good that—yes, it is very good. Listen, I do in verity
believe that this husband of yours is innocent—but the affair marches
badly. If I am to save him, I must know all there is to know—even if it
should seem to make the case against him blacker than before.”

“How well you understand,” said Ursula.

“So you will tell me the whole story, will you not? From the beginning.”

“You’re not going to send _me_ away, I hope,” said Caroline, settling
herself comfortably in an arm-chair. “What I want to know,” she
continued, “is why this child was masquerading as a parlormaid?”

“Masquerading?” I queried.

“That’s what I said. Why did you do it, child? For a wager?”

“For a living,” said Ursula dryly.

And encouraged, she began the story which I reproduce here in my own
words.

Ursula Bourne, it seemed, was one of a family of seven—impoverished
Irish gentlefolk. On the death of her father, most of the girls were
cast out into the world to earn their own living. Ursula’s eldest
sister was married to Captain Folliott. It was she whom I had seen
that Sunday, and the cause of her embarrassment was clear enough now.
Determined to earn her living and not attracted to the idea of being a
nursery governess—the one profession open to an untrained girl, Ursula
preferred the job of parlormaid. She scorned to label herself a “lady
parlormaid.” She would be the real thing, her reference being supplied
by her sister. At Fernly, despite an aloofness which, as has been seen,
caused some comment, she was a success at her job—quick, competent, and
thorough.

“I enjoyed the work,” she explained. “And I had plenty of time to
myself.”

And then came her meeting with Ralph Paton, and the love affair which
culminated in a secret marriage. Ralph had persuaded her into that,
somewhat against her will. He had declared that his stepfather would
not hear of his marrying a penniless girl. Better to be married
secretly, and break the news to him at some later and more favorable
minute.

And so the deed was done, and Ursula Bourne became Ursula Paton.
Ralph had declared that he meant to pay off his debts, find a job, and
then, when he was in a position to support her, and independent of his
adopted father, they would break the news to him.

But to people like Ralph Paton, turning over a new leaf is easier in
theory than in practice. He hoped that his stepfather, whilst still
in ignorance of the marriage, might be persuaded to pay his debts and
put him on his feet again. But the revelation of the amount of Ralph’s
liabilities merely enraged Roger Ackroyd, and he refused to do anything
at all. Some months passed, and then Ralph was bidden once more to
Fernly. Roger Ackroyd did not beat about the bush. It was the desire of
his heart that Ralph should marry Flora, and he put the matter plainly
before the young man.

And here it was that the innate weakness of Ralph Paton showed itself.
As always, he grasped at the easy, the immediate solution. As far
as I could make out, neither Flora nor Ralph made any pretence of
love. It was, on both sides, a business arrangement. Roger Ackroyd
dictated his wishes—they agreed to them. Flora accepted a chance of
liberty, money, and an enlarged horizon, Ralph, of course, was playing
a different game. But he was in a very awkward hole financially. He
seized at the chance. His debts would be paid. He could start again
with a clean sheet. His was not a nature to envisage the future, but
I gather that he saw vaguely the engagement with Flora being broken
off after a decent interval had elapsed. Both Flora and he stipulated
that it should be kept a secret for the present. He was anxious to
conceal it from Ursula. He felt instinctively that her nature, strong
and resolute, with an inherent distaste for duplicity, was not one to
welcome such a course.

Then came the crucial moment when Roger Ackroyd, always high-handed,
decided to announce the engagement. He said no word of his intention
to Ralph—only to Flora, and Flora, apathetic, raised no objection. On
Ursula, the news fell like a bombshell. Summoned by her, Ralph came
hurriedly down from town. They met in the wood, where part of their
conversation was overheard by my sister. Ralph implored her to keep
silent for a little while longer, Ursula was equally determined to have
done with concealments. She would tell Mr. Ackroyd the truth without
any further delay. Husband and wife parted acrimoniously.

Ursula, steadfast in her purpose, sought an interview with Roger
Ackroyd that very afternoon, and revealed the truth to him. Their
interview was a stormy one—it might have been even more stormy had not
Roger Ackroyd been already obsessed with his own troubles. It was bad
enough, however. Ackroyd was not the kind of man to forgive the deceit
that had been practiced upon him. His rancor was mainly directed to
Ralph, but Ursula came in for her share, since he regarded her as a
girl who had deliberately tried to “entrap” the adopted son of a very
wealthy man. Unforgivable things were said on both sides.

That same evening Ursula met Ralph by appointment in the small
summer-house, stealing out from the house by the side door in order to
do so. Their interview was made up of reproaches on both sides. Ralph
charged Ursula with having irretrievably ruined his prospects by her
ill-timed revelation. Ursula reproached Ralph with his duplicity.

They parted at last. A little over half an hour later came the
discovery of Roger Ackroyd’s body. Since that night Ursula had neither
seen nor heard from Ralph.

As the story unfolded itself, I realized more and more what a damning
series of facts it was. Alive, Ackroyd could hardly have failed to
alter his will—I knew him well enough to realize that to do so would
be his first thought. His death came in the nick of time for Ralph and
Ursula Paton. Small wonder the girl had held her tongue, and played her
part so consistently.

My meditations were interrupted. It was Poirot’s voice speaking, and I
knew from the gravity of his tone that he, too, was fully alive to the
implications of the position.

“Mademoiselle, I must ask you one question, and you must answer it
truthfully, for on it everything may hang: What time was it when you
parted from Captain Ralph Paton in the summer-house? Now, take a little
minute so that your answer may be very exact.”

The girl gave a half laugh, bitter enough in all conscience.

“Do you think I haven’t gone over that again and again in my own mind?
It was just half-past nine when I went out to meet him. Major Blunt
was walking up and down the terrace, so I had to go round through the
bushes to avoid him. It must have been about twenty-seven minutes to
ten when I reached the summer-house. Ralph was waiting for me. I was
with him ten minutes—not longer, for it was just a quarter to ten when
I got back to the house.”

I saw now the insistence of her question the other day. If only Ackroyd
could have been proved to have been killed before a quarter to ten, and
not after.

I saw the reflection of that thought in Poirot’s next question.

“Who left the summer-house first?”

“I did.”

“Leaving Ralph Paton in the summer-house?”

“Yes—but you don’t think——”

“Mademoiselle, it is of no importance what I think. What did you do
when you got back to the house?”

“I went up to my room.”

“And stayed there until when?”

“Until about ten o’clock.”

“Is there any one who can prove that?”

“Prove? That I was in my room, you mean? Oh! no. But surely—oh! I see,
they might think—they might think——”

I saw the dawning horror in her eyes.

Poirot finished the sentence for her.

“That it was _you_ who entered by the window and stabbed Mr. Ackroyd as
he sat in his chair? Yes, they might think just that.”

“Nobody but a fool would think any such thing,” said Caroline
indignantly.

She patted Ursula on the shoulder.

The girl had her face hidden in her hands.

“Horrible,” she was murmuring. “Horrible.”

Caroline gave her a friendly shake.

“Don’t worry, my dear,” she said. “M. Poirot doesn’t think that really.
As for that husband of yours, I don’t think much of him, and I tell you
so candidly. Running away and leaving you to face the music.”

But Ursula shook her head energetically.

“Oh, no,” she cried. “It wasn’t like that at all. Ralph would not run
away on his own account. I see now. If he heard of his stepfather’s
murder, he might think himself that I had done it.”

“He wouldn’t think any such thing,” said Caroline.

“I was so cruel to him that night—so hard and bitter. I wouldn’t listen
to what he was trying to say—wouldn’t believe that he really cared.
I just stood there telling him what I thought of him, and saying the
coldest, cruelest things that came into my mind—trying my best to hurt
him.”

“Do him no harm,” said Caroline. “Never worry about what you say to a
man. They’re so conceited that they never believe you mean it if it’s
unflattering.”

Ursula went on, nervously twisting and untwisting her hands.

“When the murder was discovered and he didn’t come forward, I was
terribly upset. Just for a moment I wondered—but then I knew he
couldn’t—he couldn’t.... But I wished he would come forward and say
openly that he’d had nothing to do with it. I knew that he was very
fond of Dr. Sheppard, and I fancied that perhaps Dr. Sheppard might
know where he was hiding.”

She turned to me.

“That’s why I said what I did to you that day. I thought, if you knew
where he was, you might pass on the message to him.”

“I?” I exclaimed.

“Why should James know where he was?” demanded Caroline sharply.

“It was very unlikely, I know,” admitted Ursula, “but Ralph had often
spoken of Dr. Sheppard, and I knew that he would be likely to consider
him as his best friend in King’s Abbot.”

“My dear child,” I said, “I have not the least idea where Ralph Paton
is at the present moment.”

“That is true enough,” said Poirot.

“But——” Ursula held out the newspaper cutting in a puzzled fashion.

“Ah! that,” said Poirot, slightly embarrassed; “a _bagatelle_,
mademoiselle. A _rien du tout_. Not for a moment do I believe that
Ralph Paton has been arrested.”

“But then——” began the girl slowly.

Poirot went on quickly:—

“There is one thing I should like to know—did Captain Paton wear shoes
or boots that night?”

Ursula shook her head.

“I can’t remember.”

“A pity! But how should you? Now, madame,” he smiled at her, his head
on one side, his forefinger wagging eloquently, “no questions. And
do not torment yourself. Be of good courage, and place your faith in
Hercule Poirot.”




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                        POIROT’S LITTLE REUNION


“And now,” said Caroline, rising, “that child is coming upstairs to lie
down. Don’t you worry, my dear. M. Poirot will do everything he can for
you—be sure of that.”

“I ought to go back to Fernly,” said Ursula uncertainly.

But Caroline silenced her protests with a firm hand.

“Nonsense. You’re in my hands for the time being. You’ll stay here for
the present, anyway—eh, M. Poirot?”

“It will be the best plan,” agreed the little Belgian. “This evening I
shall want mademoiselle—I beg her pardon, madame—to attend my little
reunion. Nine o’clock at my house. It is most necessary that she should
be there.”

Caroline nodded, and went with Ursula out of the room. The door shut
behind them. Poirot dropped down into a chair again.

“So far, so good,” he said. “Things are straightening themselves out.”

“They’re getting to look blacker and blacker against Ralph Paton,” I
observed gloomily.

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, that is so. But it was to be expected, was it not?”

I looked at him, slightly puzzled by the remark. He was leaning back in
the chair, his eyes half closed, the tips of his fingers just touching
each other. Suddenly he sighed and shook his head.

“What is it?” I asked.

“It is that there are moments when a great longing for my friend
Hastings comes over me. That is the friend of whom I spoke to you—the
one who resides now in the Argentine. Always, when I have had a big
case, he has been by my side. And he has helped me—yes, often he has
helped me. For he had a knack, that one, of stumbling over the truth
unawares—without noticing it himself, _bien entendu_. At times he has
said something particularly foolish, and behold that foolish remark has
revealed the truth to me! And then, too, it was his practice to keep a
written record of the cases that proved interesting.”

I gave a slight embarrassed cough.

“As far as that goes,” I began, and then stopped.

Poirot sat upright in his chair. His eyes sparkled.

“But yes? What is it that you would say?”

“Well, as a matter of fact, I’ve read some of Captain Hastings’s
narratives, and I thought, why not try my hand at something of the same
kind? Seemed a pity not to—unique opportunity—probably the only time
I’ll be mixed up with anything of this kind.”

I felt myself getting hotter and hotter, and more and more incoherent,
as I floundered through the above speech.

Poirot sprang from his chair. I had a moment’s terror that he was going
to embrace me French fashion, but mercifully he refrained.

“But this is magnificent—you have then written down your impressions of
the case as you went along?”

I nodded.

“_Epatant!_” cried Poirot. “Let me see them—this instant.”

I was not quite prepared for such a sudden demand. I racked my brains
to remember certain details.

“I hope you won’t mind,” I stammered. “I may have been a
little—er—_personal_ now and then.”

“Oh! I comprehend perfectly; you have referred to me as comic—as,
perhaps, ridiculous now and then? It matters not at all. Hastings,
he also was not always polite. Me, I have the mind above such
trivialities.”

Still somewhat doubtful, I rummaged in the drawers of my desk and
produced an untidy pile of manuscript which I handed over to him. With
an eye on possible publication in the future, I had divided the work
into chapters, and the night before I had brought it up to date with an
account of Miss Russell’s visit. Poirot had therefore twenty chapters.

I left him with them.

I was obliged to go out to a case at some distance away, and it was
past eight o’clock when I got back, to be greeted with a plate of hot
dinner on a tray, and the announcement that Poirot and my sister had
supped together at half-past seven, and that the former had then gone
to my workshop to finish his reading of the manuscript.

“I hope, James,” said my sister, “that you’ve been careful in what you
say about me in it?”

My jaw dropped. I had not been careful at all.

“Not that it matters very much,” said Caroline, reading my expression
correctly. “M. Poirot will know what to think. He understands me much
better than you do.”

I went into the workshop. Poirot was sitting by the window. The
manuscript lay neatly piled on a chair beside him. He laid his hand on
it and spoke.

“_Eh bien_,” he said, “I congratulate you—on your modesty!”

“Oh!” I said, rather taken aback.

“And on your reticence,” he added.

I said “Oh!” again.

“Not so did Hastings write,” continued my friend. “On every page,
many, many times was the word ‘I.’ What _he_ thought—what _he_ did.
But you—you have kept your personality in the background; only once or
twice does it obtrude—in scenes of home life, shall we say?”

I blushed a little before the twinkle in his eye.

“What do you really think of the stuff?” I asked nervously.

“You want my candid opinion?”

“Yes.”

Poirot laid his jesting manner aside.

“A very meticulous and accurate account,” he said kindly. “You have
recorded all the facts faithfully and exactly—though you have shown
yourself becomingly reticent as to your own share in them.”

“And it has helped you?”

“Yes. I may say that it has helped me considerably. Come, we must go
over to my house and set the stage for my little performance.”

Caroline was in the hall. I think she hoped that she might be invited
to accompany us. Poirot dealt with the situation tactfully.

“I should much like to have had you present, mademoiselle,” he said
regretfully, “but at this juncture it would not be wise. See you, all
these people to-night are suspects. Amongst them, I shall find the
person who killed Mr. Ackroyd.”

“You really believe that?” I said incredulously.

“I see that you do not,” said Poirot dryly. “Not yet do you appreciate
Hercule Poirot at his true worth.”

At that minute Ursula came down the staircase.

“You are ready, my child?” said Poirot. “That is good. We will go to
my house together. Mademoiselle Caroline, believe me, I do everything
possible to render you service. Good-evening.”

We went out, leaving Caroline, rather like a dog who has been refused a
walk, standing on the front door step gazing after us.

The sitting-room at The Larches had been got ready. On the table were
various _sirops_ and glasses. Also a plate of biscuits. Several chairs
had been brought in from the other room.

Poirot ran to and fro rearranging things. Pulling out a chair here,
altering the position of a lamp there, occasionally stooping to
straighten one of the mats that covered the floor. He was specially
fussy over the lighting. The lamps were arranged in such a way as to
throw a clear light on the side of the room where the chairs were
grouped, at the same time leaving the other end of the room, where I
presumed Poirot himself would sit, in a dim twilight.

Ursula and I watched him. Presently a bell was heard.

“They arrive,” said Poirot. “Good, all is in readiness.”

The door opened and the party from Fernly filed in. Poirot went forward
and greeted Mrs. Ackroyd and Flora.

“It is most good of you to come,” he said. “And Major Blunt and Mr.
Raymond.”

The secretary was debonair as ever.

“What’s the great idea?” he said, laughing. “Some scientific machine?
Do we have bands round our wrists which register guilty heart-beats?
There is such an invention, isn’t there?”

“I have read of it, yes,” admitted Poirot. “But me, I am old-fashioned.
I use the old methods. I work only with the little gray cells. Now let
us begin—but first I have an announcement to make to you all.”

He took Ursula’s hand and drew her forward.

“This lady is Mrs. Ralph Paton. She was married to Captain Paton last
March.”

A little shriek burst from Mrs. Ackroyd.

“Ralph! Married! Last March! Oh! but it’s absurd. How could he be?”

She stared at Ursula as though she had never seen her before.

“Married to Bourne?” she said. “Really, M. Poirot, I don’t believe you.”

Ursula flushed and began to speak, but Flora forestalled her.

Going quickly to the other girl’s side, she passed her hand through her
arm.

“You must not mind our being surprised,” she said. “You see, we had no
idea of such a thing. You and Ralph have kept your secret very well. I
am—very glad about it.”

“You are very kind, Miss Ackroyd,” said Ursula in a low voice, “and
you have every right to be exceedingly angry. Ralph behaved very
badly—especially to you.”

“You needn’t worry about that,” said Flora, giving her arm a consoling
little pat. “Ralph was in a corner and took the only way out. I should
probably have done the same in his place. I do think he might have
trusted me with the secret, though. I wouldn’t have let him down.”

Poirot rapped gently on a table and cleared his throat significantly.

“The board meeting’s going to begin,” said Flora. “M. Poirot hints that
we mustn’t talk. But just tell me one thing. Where is Ralph? You must
know if any one does.”

“But I don’t,” cried Ursula, almost in a wail. “That’s just it, I
don’t.”

“Isn’t he detained at Liverpool?” asked Raymond. “It said so in the
paper.”

“He is not at Liverpool,” said Poirot shortly.

“In fact,” I remarked, “no one knows where he is.”

“Excepting Hercule Poirot, eh?” said Raymond.

Poirot replied seriously to the other’s banter.

“Me, I know everything. Remember that.”

Geoffrey Raymond lifted his eyebrows.

“Everything?” He whistled. “Whew! that’s a tall order.”

“Do you mean to say you can really guess where Ralph Paton is hiding?”
I asked incredulously.

“You call it guessing. I call it knowing, my friend.”

“In Cranchester?” I hazarded.

“No,” replied Poirot gravely, “not in Cranchester.”

He said no more, but at a gesture from him the assembled party took
their seats. As they did so, the door opened once more and two other
people came in and sat down near the door. They were Parker and the
housekeeper.

“The number is complete,” said Poirot. “Every one is here.”

There was a ring of satisfaction in his tone. And with the sound of it
I saw a ripple of something like uneasiness pass over all those faces
grouped at the other end of the room. There was a suggestion in all
this as of a trap—a trap that had closed.

Poirot read from a list in an important manner.

“Mrs. Ackroyd, Miss Flora Ackroyd, Major Blunt, Mr. Geoffrey Raymond,
Mrs. Ralph Paton, John Parker, Elizabeth Russell.”

He laid the paper down on the table.

“What’s the meaning of all this?” began Raymond.

“The list I have just read,” said Poirot, “is a list of suspected
persons. Every one of you present had the opportunity to kill Mr.
Ackroyd——”

With a cry Mrs. Ackroyd sprang up, her throat working.

“I don’t like it,” she wailed. “I don’t like it. I would much prefer to
go home.”

“You cannot go home, madame,” said Poirot sternly, “until you have
heard what I have to say.”

He paused a moment, then cleared his throat.

“I will start at the beginning. When Miss Ackroyd asked me to
investigate the case, I went up to Fernly Park with the good Dr.
Sheppard. I walked with him along the terrace, where I was shown the
footprints on the window-sill. From there Inspector Raglan took me
along the path which leads to the drive. My eye was caught by a little
summer-house, and I searched it thoroughly. I found two things—a scrap
of starched cambric and an empty goose quill. The scrap of cambric
immediately suggested to me a maid’s apron. When Inspector Raglan
showed me his list of the people in the house, I noticed at once that
one of the maids—Ursula Bourne, the parlormaid—had no real alibi.
According to her own story, she was in her bedroom from nine-thirty
until ten. But supposing that instead she was in the summer-house?
If so, she must have gone there to meet some one. Now we know from
Dr. Sheppard that some one from outside _did_ come to the house that
night—the stranger whom he met just by the gate. At a first glance it
would seem that our problem was solved, and that the stranger went to
the summer-house to meet Ursula Bourne. It was fairly certain that he
_did_ go to the summer-house because of the goose quill. That suggested
at once to my mind a taker of drugs—and one who had acquired the habit
on the other side of the Atlantic where sniffing ‘snow’ is more common
than in this country. The man whom Dr. Sheppard met had an American
accent, which fitted in with that supposition.

“But I was held up by one point. _The times did not fit._ Ursula
Bourne could certainly not have gone to the summer-house before
nine-thirty, whereas the man must have got there by a few minutes
past nine. I could, of course, assume that he waited there for half
an hour. The only alternative supposition was that there had been two
separate meetings in the summer-house that night. _Eh bien_, as soon
as I went into that alternative I found several significant facts. I
discovered that Miss Russell, the housekeeper, had visited Dr. Sheppard
that morning, and had displayed a good deal of interest in cures for
victims of the drug habit. Taking that in conjunction with the goose
quill, I assumed that the man in question came to Fernly to meet the
housekeeper, and not Ursula Bourne. Who, then, did Ursula Bourne come
to the rendezvous to meet? I was not long in doubt. First I found a
ring—a wedding ring—with ‘From R.’ and a date inside it. Then I learnt
that Ralph Paton had been seen coming up the path which led to the
summer-house at twenty-five minutes past nine, and I also heard of
a certain conversation which had taken place in the wood near the
village that very afternoon—a conversation between Ralph Paton and
some unknown girl. So I had my facts succeeding each other in a neat
and orderly manner. A secret marriage, an engagement announced on the
day of the tragedy, the stormy interview in the wood, and the meeting
arranged for the summer-house that night.

“Incidentally this proved to me one thing, that both Ralph Paton and
Ursula Bourne (or Paton) had the strongest motives for wishing Mr.
Ackroyd out of the way. And it also made one other point unexpectedly
clear. It could not have been Ralph Paton who was with Mr. Ackroyd in
the study at nine-thirty.

“So we come to another and most interesting aspect of the crime. Who
was it in the room with Mr. Ackroyd at nine-thirty? Not Ralph Paton,
who was in the summer-house with his wife. Not Charles Kent, who
had already left. Who, then? I posed my cleverest—my most audacious
question: _Was any one with him?_”

Poirot leaned forward and shot the last words triumphantly at us,
drawing back afterwards with the air of one who has made a decided hit.

Raymond, however, did not seem impressed, and lodged a mild protest.

“I don’t know if you’re trying to make me out a liar, M. Poirot, but
the matter does not rest on my evidence alone—except perhaps as to the
exact words used. Remember, Major Blunt also heard Mr. Ackroyd talking
to some one. He was on the terrace outside, and couldn’t catch the
words clearly, but he distinctly heard the voices.”

Poirot nodded.

“I have not forgotten,” he said quietly. “But Major Blunt was under the
impression that it was _you_ to whom Mr. Ackroyd was speaking.”

For a moment Raymond seemed taken aback. Then he recovered himself.

“Blunt knows now that he was mistaken,” he said.

“Exactly,” agreed the other man.

“Yet there must have been some reason for his thinking so,” mused
Poirot. “Oh! no,” he held up his hand in protest, “I know the reason
you will give—but it is not enough. We must seek elsewhere. I will put
it this way. From the beginning of the case I have been struck by one
thing—the nature of those words which Mr. Raymond overheard. It has
been amazing to me that no one has commented on them—has seen anything
odd about them.”

He paused a minute, and then quoted softly:—

“... _The calls on my purse have been so frequent of late that I fear
it is impossible for me to accede to your request._ Does nothing strike
you as odd about that?”

“I don’t think so,” said Raymond. “He has frequently dictated letters
to me, using almost exactly those same words.”

“Exactly,” cried Poirot. “That is what I seek to arrive at. Would any
man use such a phrase in _talking_ to another? Impossible that that
should be part of a real conversation. Now, if he had been dictating a
letter——”

“You mean he was reading a letter aloud,” said Raymond slowly. “Even
so, he must have been reading to some one.”

“But why? We have no evidence that there was any one else in the room.
No other voice but Mr. Ackroyd’s was heard, remember.”

“Surely a man wouldn’t read letters of that type aloud to himself—not
unless he was—well—going balmy.”

“You have all forgotten one thing,” said Poirot softly: “the stranger
who called at the house the preceding Wednesday.”

They all stared at him.

“But yes,” said Poirot, nodding encouragingly, “on Wednesday. The
young man was not of himself important. But the firm he represented
interested me very much.”

“The Dictaphone Company,” gasped Raymond. “I see it now. A dictaphone.
That’s what you think?”

Poirot nodded.

“Mr. Ackroyd had promised to invest in a dictaphone, you remember.
Me, I had the curiosity to inquire of the company in question. Their
reply is that Mr. Ackroyd _did_ purchase a dictaphone from their
representative. Why he concealed the matter from you, I do not know.”

“He must have meant to surprise me with it,” murmured Raymond. “He had
quite a childish love of surprising people. Meant to keep it up his
sleeve for a day or so. Probably was playing with it like a new toy.
Yes, it fits in. You’re quite right—no one would use quite those words
in casual conversation.”

“It explains, too,” said Poirot, “why Major Blunt thought it was you
who were in the study. Such scraps as came to him were fragments of
dictation, and so his subconscious mind deduced that you were with him.
His conscious mind was occupied with something quite different—the
white figure he had caught a glimpse of. He fancied it was Miss
Ackroyd. Really, of course, it was Ursula Bourne’s white apron he saw
as she was stealing down to the summer-house.”

Raymond had recovered from his first surprise.

“All the same,” he remarked, “this discovery of yours, brilliant though
it is (I’m quite sure I should never have thought of it), leaves the
essential position unchanged. Mr. Ackroyd was alive at nine-thirty,
since he was speaking into the dictaphone. It seems clear that the man
Charles Kent was really off the premises by then. As to Ralph Paton——?”

He hesitated, glancing at Ursula.

Her color flared up, but she answered steadily enough.

“Ralph and I parted just before a quarter to ten. He never went near
the house, I am sure of that. He had no intention of doing so. The last
thing on earth he wanted was to face his stepfather. He would have
funked it badly.”

“It isn’t that I doubt your story for a moment,” explained Raymond.
“I’ve always been quite sure Captain Paton was innocent. But one has to
think of a court of law—and the questions that would be asked. He is in
a most unfortunate position, but if he were to come forward——”

Poirot interrupted.

“That is your advice, yes? That he should come forward?”

“Certainly. If you know where he is——”

“I perceive that you do not believe that I do know. And yet I have told
you just now that I know everything. The truth of the telephone call,
of the footprints on the window-sill, of the hiding-place of Ralph
Paton——”

“Where is he?” said Blunt sharply.

“Not very far away,” said Poirot, smiling.

“In Cranchester?” I asked.

Poirot turned towards me.

“Always you ask me that. The idea of Cranchester it is with you an
_idée fixe_. No, he is not in Cranchester. He is—_there_!”

He pointed a dramatic forefinger. Every one’s head turned.

Ralph Paton was standing in the doorway.




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                          RALPH PATON’S STORY


It was a very uncomfortable minute for _me_. I hardly took in what
happened next, but there were exclamations and cries of surprise! When
I was sufficiently master of myself to be able to realize what was
going on, Ralph Paton was standing by his wife, her hand in his, and he
was smiling across the room at me.

Poirot, too, was smiling, and at the same time shaking an eloquent
finger at me.

“Have I not told you at least thirty-six times that it is useless to
conceal things from Hercule Poirot?” he demanded. “That in such a case
he finds out?”

He turned to the others.

“One day, you remember, we held a little séance about a table—just
the six of us. I accused the other five persons present of concealing
something from me. Four of them gave up their secret. Dr. Sheppard did
not give up his. But all along I have had my suspicions. Dr. Sheppard
went to the Three Boars that night hoping to find Ralph. He did not
find him there; but supposing, I said to myself, that he met him in the
street on his way home? Dr. Sheppard was a friend of Captain Paton’s,
and he had come straight from the scene of the crime. He must know that
things looked very black against him. Perhaps he knew more than the
general public did——”

“I did,” I said ruefully. “I suppose I might as well make a clean
breast of things now. I went to see Ralph that afternoon. At first he
refused to take me into his confidence, but later he told me about his
marriage, and the hole he was in. As soon as the murder was discovered,
I realized that once the facts were known, suspicion could not fail to
attach to Ralph—or, if not to him, to the girl he loved. That night I
put the facts plainly before him. The thought of having possibly to
give evidence which might incriminate his wife made him resolve at all
costs to—to——”

I hesitated, and Ralph filled up the gap.

“To do a bunk,” he said graphically. “You see, Ursula left me to go
back to the house. I thought it possible that she might have attempted
to have another interview with my stepfather. He had already been very
rude to her that afternoon. It occurred to me that he might have so
insulted her—in such an unforgivable manner—that without knowing what
she was doing——”

He stopped. Ursula released her hand from his, and stepped back.

“You thought that, Ralph! You actually thought that I might have done
it?”

“Let us get back to the culpable conduct of Dr. Sheppard,” said Poirot
dryly. “Dr. Sheppard consented to do what he could to help him. He was
successful in hiding Captain Paton from the police.”

“Where?” asked Raymond. “In his own house?”

“Ah, no, indeed,” said Poirot. “You should ask yourself the question
that I did. If the good doctor is concealing the young man, what place
would he choose? It must necessarily be somewhere near at hand. I think
of Cranchester. A hotel? No. Lodgings? Even more emphatically, no.
Where, then? Ah! I have it. A nursing home. A home for the mentally
unfit. I test my theory. I invent a nephew with mental trouble. I
consult Mademoiselle Sheppard as to suitable homes. She gives me the
names of two near Cranchester to which her brother has sent patients. I
make inquiries. Yes, at one of them a patient was brought there by the
doctor himself early on Saturday morning. That patient, though known
by another name, I had no difficulty in identifying as Captain Paton.
After certain necessary formalities, I was allowed to bring him away.
He arrived at my house in the early hours of yesterday morning.”

I looked at him ruefully.

“Caroline’s Home Office expert,” I murmured. “And to think I never
guessed!”

“You see now why I drew attention to the reticence of your manuscript,”
murmured Poirot. “It was strictly truthful as far as it went—but it did
not go very far, eh, my friend?”

I was too abashed to argue.

“Dr. Sheppard has been very loyal,” said Ralph. “He has stood by me
through thick and thin. He did what he thought was the best. I see now,
from what M. Poirot has told me, that it was not really the best. I
should have come forward and faced the music. You see, in the home, we
never saw a newspaper. I knew nothing of what was going on.”

“Dr. Sheppard has been a model of discretion,” said Poirot dryly. “But
me, I discover all the little secrets. It is my business.”

“Now we can have your story of what happened that night,” said Raymond
impatiently.

“You know it already,” said Ralph. “There’s very little for me to add.
I left the summer-house about nine-forty-five, and tramped about the
lanes, trying to make up my mind as to what to do next—what line to
take. I’m bound to admit that I’ve not the shadow of an alibi, but I
give you my solemn word that I never went to the study, that I never
saw my stepfather alive—or dead. Whatever the world thinks, I’d like
all of you to believe me.”

“No alibi,” murmured Raymond. “That’s bad. I believe you, of course,
but—it’s a bad business.”

“It makes things very simple, though,” said Poirot, in a cheerful
voice. “Very simple indeed.”

We all stared at him.

“You see what I mean? No? Just this—to save Captain Paton the real
criminal must confess.”

He beamed round at us all.

“But yes—I mean what I say. See now, I did not invite Inspector Raglan
to be present. That was for a reason. I did not want to tell him all
that I knew—at least I did not want to tell him to-night.”

He leaned forward, and suddenly his voice and his whole personality
changed. He suddenly became dangerous.

“I who speak to you—I know the murderer of Mr. Ackroyd is in this
room now. It is to the murderer I speak. _To-morrow the truth goes to
Inspector Raglan._ You understand?”

There was a tense silence. Into the midst of it came the old Breton
woman with a telegram on a salver. Poirot tore it open.

Blunt’s voice rose abrupt and resonant.

“The murderer is amongst us, you say? You know—which?”

Poirot had read the message. He crumpled it up in his hand.

“I know—now.”

He tapped the crumpled ball of paper.

“What is that?” said Raymond sharply.

“A wireless message—from a steamer now on her way to the United States.”

There was a dead silence. Poirot rose to his feet bowing.

“Messieurs et Mesdames, this reunion of mine is at an end.
Remember—_the truth goes to Inspector Raglan in the morning_.”




                              CHAPTER XXV

                            THE WHOLE TRUTH


A slight gesture from Poirot enjoined me to stay behind the rest. I
obeyed, going over to the fire and thoughtfully stirring the big logs
on it with the toe of my boot.

I was puzzled. For the first time I was absolutely at sea as to
Poirot’s meaning. For a moment I was inclined to think that the scene
I had just witnessed was a gigantic piece of bombast—that he had been
what he called “playing the comedy” with a view to making himself
interesting and important. But, in spite of myself, I was forced to
believe in an underlying reality. There had been real menace in his
words—a certain indisputable sincerity. But I still believed him to be
on entirely the wrong tack.

When the door shut behind the last of the party he came over to the
fire.

“Well, my friend,” he said quietly, “and what do you think of it all?”

“I don’t know what to think,” I said frankly. “What was the point? Why
not go straight to Inspector Raglan with the truth instead of giving
the guilty person this elaborate warning?”

Poirot sat down and drew out his case of tiny Russian cigarettes. He
smoked for a minute or two in silence. Then:—

“Use your little gray cells,” he said. “There is always a reason behind
my actions.”

I hesitated for a moment, and then I said slowly:

“The first one that occurs to me is that you yourself do not know who
the guilty person is, but that you are sure that he is to be found
amongst the people here to-night. Therefore your words were intended to
force a confession from the unknown murderer?”

Poirot nodded approvingly.

“A clever idea, but not the truth.”

“I thought, perhaps, that by making him believe you knew, you might
force him out into the open—not necessarily by confession. He might try
to silence you as he formerly silenced Mr. Ackroyd—before you could act
to-morrow morning.”

“A trap with myself as the bait! _Merci, mon ami_, but I am not
sufficiently heroic for that.”

“Then I fail to understand you. Surely you are running the risk of
letting the murderer escape by thus putting him on his guard?”

Poirot shook his head.

“He cannot escape,” he said gravely. “There is only one way out—and
that way does not lead to freedom.”

“You really believe that one of those people here to-night committed
the murder?” I asked incredulously.

“Yes, my friend.”

“Which one?”

There was a silence for some minutes. Then Poirot tossed the stump of
his cigarette into the grate and began to speak in a quiet, reflective
tone.

“I will take you the way that I have traveled myself. Step by step
you shall accompany me, and see for yourself that all the facts point
indisputably to one person. Now, to begin with, there were two facts
and one little discrepancy in time which especially attracted my
attention. The first fact was the telephone call. If Ralph Paton were
indeed the murderer, the telephone call became meaningless and absurd.
Therefore, I said to myself, Ralph Paton is not the murderer.

“I satisfied myself that the call could not have been sent by any one
in the house, yet I was convinced that it was amongst those present
on the fatal evening that I had to look for my criminal. Therefore I
concluded that the telephone call must have been sent by an accomplice.
I was not quite pleased with that deduction, but I let it stand for the
minute.

“I next examined the _motive_ for the call. That was difficult. I could
only get at it by judging its _result_. Which was—that the murder was
discovered that night instead of—in all probability—the following
morning. You agree with that?”

“Ye-es,” I admitted. “Yes. As you say, Mr. Ackroyd, having given orders
that he was not to be disturbed, nobody would have been likely to go to
the study that night.”

“_Très bien._ The affair marches, does it not? But matters were
still obscure. What was the advantage of having the crime discovered
that night in preference to the following morning? The only idea I
could get hold of was that the murderer, knowing the crime was to be
discovered at a certain time, could make sure of being present when the
door was broken in—or at any rate immediately afterwards. And now we
come to the second fact—the chair pulled out from the wall. Inspector
Raglan dismissed that as of no importance. I, on the contrary, have
always regarded it as of supreme importance.

“In your manuscript you have drawn a neat little plan of the study.
If you had it with you this minute you would see that—the chair being
drawn out in the position indicated by Parker—it would stand in a
direct line between the door and the window.”

“The window!” I said quickly.

“You, too, have my first idea. I imagined that the chair was drawn out
so that something connected with the window should not be seen by any
one entering through the door. But I soon abandoned that supposition,
for though the chair was a grandfather with a high back, it obscured
very little of the window—only the part between the sash and the
ground. No, _mon ami_—but remember that just in front of the window
there stood a table with books and magazines upon it. Now that table
_was_ completely hidden by the drawn-out chair—and immediately I had my
first shadowy suspicion of the truth.

“Supposing that there had been something on that table not intended
to be seen? Something placed there by the murderer? As yet I had no
inkling of what that something might be. But I knew certain very
interesting facts about it. For instance, it was something that the
murderer had not been able to take away with him at the time that he
committed the crime. At the same time it was vital that it should be
removed as soon as possible after the crime had been discovered. And
so—the telephone message, and the opportunity for the murderer to be on
the spot when the body was discovered.

“Now four people were on the scene before the police arrived. Yourself,
Parker, Major Blunt, and Mr. Raymond. Parker I eliminated at once,
since at whatever time the crime was discovered, he was the one
person certain to be on the spot. Also it was he who told me of the
pulled-out chair. Parker, then, was cleared (of the murder, that is. I
still thought it possible that he had been blackmailing Mrs. Ferrars).
Raymond and Blunt, however, remained under suspicion since, if the
crime had been discovered in the early hours of the morning, it was
quite possible that they might have arrived on the scene too late to
prevent the object on the round table being discovered.

“Now what was that object? You heard my arguments to-night in reference
to the scrap of conversation overheard? As soon as I learned that
a representative of a dictaphone company had called, the idea of a
dictaphone took root in my mind. You heard what I said in this room not
half an hour ago? They all agreed with my theory—but one vital fact
seems to have escaped them. Granted that a dictaphone was being used by
Mr. Ackroyd that night—why was no dictaphone found?”

“I never thought of that,” I said.

“We know that a dictaphone was supplied to Mr. Ackroyd. But no
dictaphone has been found amongst his effects. So, if something was
taken from that table—why should not that something be the dictaphone?
But there were certain difficulties in the way. The attention of every
one was, of course, focused on the murdered man. I think any one could
have gone to the table unnoticed by the other people in the room. But
a dictaphone has a certain bulk—it cannot be slipped casually into
a pocket. There must have been a receptacle of some kind capable of
holding it.

“You see where I am arriving? The figure of the murderer is taking
shape. A person who was on the scene straightway, but who might not
have been if the crime had been discovered the following morning.
A person carrying a receptacle into which the dictaphone might be
fitted——”

I interrupted.

“But why remove the dictaphone? What was the point?”

“You are like Mr. Raymond. You take it for granted that what was heard
at nine-thirty was Mr. Ackroyd’s voice speaking into a dictaphone. But
consider this useful invention for a little minute. You dictate into
it, do you not? And at some later time a secretary or a typist turns it
on, and the voice speaks again.”

“You mean——” I gasped.

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, I mean that. _At nine-thirty Mr. Ackroyd was already dead._ It
was the dictaphone speaking—not the man.”

“And the murderer switched it on. Then he must have been in the room at
that minute?”

“Possibly. But we must not exclude the likelihood of some mechanical
device having been applied—something after the nature of a time lock,
or even of a simple alarm clock. But in that case we must add two
qualifications to our imaginary portrait of the murderer. It must be
some one who knew of Mr. Ackroyd’s purchase of the dictaphone and also
some one with the necessary mechanical knowledge.

“I had got thus far in my own mind when we came to the footprints on
the window ledge. Here there were three conclusions open to me. (1)
They might really have been made by Ralph Paton. He had been at Fernly
that night, and might have climbed into the study and found his uncle
dead there. That was one hypothesis. (2) There was the possibility that
the footmarks might have been made by somebody else who happened to
have the same kind of studs in his shoes. But the inmates of the house
had shoes soled with crepe rubber, and I declined to believe in the
coincidence of some one from outside having the same kind of shoes as
Ralph Paton wore. Charles Kent, as we know from the barmaid of the Dog
and Whistle, had on a pair of boots ‘clean dropping off him.’ (3) Those
prints were made by some one deliberately trying to throw suspicion
on Ralph Paton. To test this last conclusion, it was necessary to
ascertain certain facts. One pair of Ralph’s shoes had been obtained
from the Three Boars by the police. Neither Ralph nor any one else
could have worn them that evening, since they were downstairs being
cleaned. According to the police theory, Ralph was wearing another pair
of the same kind, and I found out that it was true that he had two
pairs. Now for my theory to be proved correct it was necessary for the
murderer to have worn Ralph’s shoes that evening—in which case Ralph
must have been wearing yet a _third_ pair of footwear of some kind.
I could hardly suppose that he would bring three pairs of shoes all
alike—the third pair of footwear were more likely to be boots. I got
your sister to make inquiries on this point—laying some stress on the
color, in order—I admit it frankly—to obscure the real reason for my
asking.

“You know the result of her investigations. Ralph Paton _had_ had a
pair of boots with him. The first question I asked him when he came to
my house yesterday morning was what he was wearing on his feet on the
fatal night. He replied at once that he had worn _boots_—he was still
wearing them, in fact—having nothing else to put on.

“So we get a step further in our description of the murderer—a person
who had the opportunity to take these shoes of Ralph Paton’s from the
Three Boars that day.”

He paused, and then said, with a slightly raised voice:—

“There is one further point. The murderer must have been a person who
had the opportunity to purloin that dagger from the silver table. You
might argue that any one in the house might have done so, but I will
recall to you that Miss Ackroyd was very positive that the dagger was
not there when she examined the silver table.”

He paused again.

“Let us recapitulate—now that all is clear. A person who was at the
Three Boars earlier that day, a person who knew Ackroyd well enough
to know that he had purchased a dictaphone, a person who was of a
mechanical turn of mind, who had the opportunity to take the dagger
from the silver table before Miss Flora arrived, who had with him a
receptacle suitable for hiding the dictaphone—such as a black bag, and
who had the study to himself for a few minutes after the crime was
discovered while Parker was telephoning for the police. In fact—_Dr.
Sheppard!_”




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                       AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH


There was a dead silence for a minute and a half.

Then I laughed.

“You’re mad,” I said.

“No,” said Poirot placidly. “I am not mad. It was the little
discrepancy in time that first drew my attention to you—right at the
beginning.”

“Discrepancy in time?” I queried, puzzled.

“But yes. You will remember that every one agreed—you yourself
included—that it took five minutes to walk from the lodge to the
house—less if you took the short cut to the terrace. But you left the
house at ten minutes to nine—both by your own statement and that of
Parker, and yet it was nine o’clock as you passed through the lodge
gates. It was a chilly night—not an evening a man would be inclined to
dawdle; why had you taken ten minutes to do a five-minutes’ walk? All
along I realized that we had only your statement for it that the study
window was ever fastened. Ackroyd asked you if you had done so—he never
looked to see. Supposing, then, that the study window was unfastened?
Would there be time in that ten minutes for you to run round the
outside of the house, change your shoes, climb in through the window,
kill Ackroyd, and get to the gate by nine o’clock? I decided against
that theory since in all probability a man as nervous as Ackroyd was
that night would hear you climbing in, and then there would have been
a struggle. But supposing that you killed Ackroyd _before_ you left—as
you were standing beside his chair? Then you go out of the front door,
run round to the summer-house, take Ralph Paton’s shoes out of the bag
you brought up with you that night, slip them on, walk through the
mud in them, and leave prints on the window ledge, you climb in, lock
the study door on the inside, run back to the summer-house, change
back into your own shoes, and race down to the gate. (I went through
similar actions the other day, when you were with Mrs. Ackroyd—it took
ten minutes exactly.) Then home—and an alibi—since you had timed the
dictaphone for half-past nine.”

“My dear Poirot,” I said in a voice that sounded strange and forced to
my own ears, “you’ve been brooding over this case too long. What on
earth had I to gain by murdering Ackroyd?”

“Safety. It was you who blackmailed Mrs. Ferrars. Who could have had
a better knowledge of what killed Mr. Ferrars than the doctor who was
attending him? When you spoke to me that first day in the garden,
you mentioned a legacy received about a year ago. I have been unable
to discover any trace of a legacy. You had to invent some way of
accounting for Mrs. Ferrars’s twenty thousand pounds. It has not done
you much good. You lost most of it in speculation—then you put the
screw on too hard, and Mrs. Ferrars took a way out that you had not
expected. If Ackroyd had learnt the truth he would have had no mercy on
you—you were ruined for ever.”

“And the telephone call?” I asked, trying to rally. “You have a
plausible explanation of that also, I suppose?”

“I will confess to you that it was my greatest stumbling block when
I found that a call had actually been put through to you from King’s
Abbot station. I at first believed that you had simply invented the
story. It was a very clever touch, that. You must have some excuse for
arriving at Fernly, finding the body, and so getting the chance to
remove the dictaphone on which your alibi depended. I had a very vague
notion of how it was worked when I came to see your sister that first
day and inquired as to what patients you had seen on Friday morning. I
had no thought of Miss Russell in my mind at that time. Her visit was a
lucky coincidence, since it distracted your mind from the real object
of my questions. I found what I was looking for. Among your patients
that morning was the steward of an American liner. Who more suitable
than he to be leaving for Liverpool by the train that evening? And
afterwards he would be on the high seas, well out of the way. I noted
that the _Orion_ sailed on Saturday, and having obtained the name of
the steward I sent him a wireless message asking a certain question.
This is his reply you saw me receive just now.”

He held out the message to me. It ran as follows—

“Quite correct. Dr. Sheppard asked me to leave a note at a patient’s
house. I was to ring him up from the station with the reply. Reply was
‘No answer.’”

                   *       *       *       *       *

“It was a clever idea,” said Poirot. “The call was genuine. Your sister
saw you take it. But there was only one man’s word as to what was
actually said—your own!”

I yawned.

“All this,” I said, “is very interesting—but hardly in the sphere of
practical politics.”

“You think not? Remember what I said—the truth goes to Inspector Raglan
in the morning. But, for the sake of your good sister, I am willing to
give you the chance of another way out. There might be, for instance,
an overdose of a sleeping draught. You comprehend me? But Captain Ralph
Paton must be cleared—_ça va sans dire_. I should suggest that you
finish that very interesting manuscript of yours—but abandoning your
former reticence.”

“You seem to be very prolific of suggestions,” I remarked. “Are you
sure you’ve quite finished.”

“Now that you remind me of the fact, it is true that there is one thing
more. It would be most unwise on your part to attempt to silence me as
you silenced M. Ackroyd. That kind of business does not succeed against
Hercule Poirot, you understand.”

“My dear Poirot,” I said, smiling a little, “whatever else I may be, I
am not a fool.”

I rose to my feet.

“Well, well,” I said, with a slight yawn, “I must be off home. Thank
you for a most interesting and instructive evening.”

Poirot also rose and bowed with his accustomed politeness as I passed
out of the room.




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                               APOLOGIA


Five a.m. I am very tired—but I have finished my task. My arm aches
from writing.

A strange end to my manuscript. I meant it to be published some day as
the history of one of Poirot’s failures! Odd, how things pan out.

All along I’ve had a premonition of disaster, from the moment I saw
Ralph Paton and Mrs. Ferrars with their heads together. I thought then
that she was confiding in him; as it happened I was quite wrong there,
but the idea persisted even after I went into the study with Ackroyd
that night, until he told me the truth.

Poor old Ackroyd. I’m always glad that I gave him a chance. I urged him
to read that letter before it was too late. Or let me be honest—didn’t
I subconsciously realize that with a pig-headed chap like him, it was
my best chance of getting him _not_ to read it? His nervousness that
night was interesting psychologically. He knew danger was close at
hand. And yet he never suspected _me_.

The dagger was an afterthought. I’d brought up a very handy little
weapon of my own, but when I saw the dagger lying in the silver table,
it occurred to me at once how much better it would be to use a weapon
that couldn’t be traced to me.

I suppose I must have meant to murder him all along. As soon as I heard
of Mrs. Ferrars’s death, I felt convinced that she would have told him
everything before she died. When I met him and he seemed so agitated,
I thought that perhaps he knew the truth, but that he couldn’t bring
himself to believe it, and was going to give me the chance of refuting
it.

So I went home and took my precautions. If the trouble were after all
only something to do with Ralph—well, no harm would have been done. The
dictaphone he had given me two days before to adjust. Something had
gone a little wrong with it, and I persuaded him to let me have a go at
it, instead of sending it back. I did what I wanted to it, and took it
up with me in my bag that evening.

I am rather pleased with myself as a writer. What could be neater, for
instance, than the following:—

“_The letters were brought in at twenty minutes to nine. It was just
on ten minutes to nine when I left him, the letter still unread. I
hesitated with my hand on the door handle, looking back and wondering
if there was anything I had left undone._”

All true, you see. But suppose I had put a row of stars after the first
sentence! Would somebody then have wondered what exactly happened in
that blank ten minutes?

When I looked round the room from the door, I was quite satisfied.
Nothing had been left undone. The dictaphone was on the table by the
window, timed to go off at nine-thirty (the mechanism of that little
device was rather clever—based on the principle of an alarm clock), and
the arm-chair was pulled out so as to hide it from the door.

I must admit that it gave me rather a shock to run into Parker just
outside the door. I have faithfully recorded that fact.

Then later, when the body was discovered, and I had sent Parker to
telephone for the police, what a judicious use of words: “_I did
what little had to be done!_” It was quite little—just to shove the
dictaphone into my bag and push back the chair against the wall in
its proper place. I never dreamed that Parker would have noticed
that chair. Logically, he ought to have been so agog over the body
as to be blind to everything else. But I hadn’t reckoned with the
trained-servant complex.

I wish I could have known beforehand that Flora was going to say she’d
seen her uncle alive at a quarter to ten. That puzzled me more than
I can say. In fact, all through the case there have been things that
puzzled me hopelessly. Every one seems to have taken a hand.

My greatest fear all through has been Caroline. I have fancied she
might guess. Curious the way she spoke that day of my “strain of
weakness.”

Well, she will never know the truth. There is, as Poirot said, one way
out....

I can trust him. He and Inspector Raglan will manage it between them. I
should not like Caroline to know. She is fond of me, and then, too, she
is proud.... My death will be a grief to her, but grief passes....

When I have finished writing, I shall enclose this whole manuscript in
an envelope and address it to Poirot.

And then—what shall it be? Veronal? There would be a kind of poetic
justice. Not that I take any responsibility for Mrs. Ferrars’s death.
It was the direct consequence of her own actions. I feel no pity for
her.

I have no pity for myself either.

So let it be veronal.

But I wish Hercule Poirot had never retired from work and come here to
grow vegetable marrows.


                                THE END




  +==================================================================+
  ‖                   “_The Books You Like to Read                   ‖
  ‖                   at the Price You Like to Pay_”                 ‖
  ‖------------------------------------------------------------------‖
  ‖                                                                  ‖
  ‖   _There Are Two Sides to Everything_—                           ‖
  ‖                                                                  ‖
  ‖   —including the wrapper which covers every Grosset & Dunlap     ‖
  ‖   book. When you feel in the mood for a good romance, refer to   ‖
  ‖   the carefully selected list of modern fiction comprising most  ‖
  ‖   of the successes by prominent writers of the day which is      ‖
  ‖   printed on the back of every Grosset & Dunlap book wrapper.    ‖
  ‖                                                                  ‖
  ‖   You will find more than five hundred titles to choose          ‖
  ‖   from—books for every mood and every taste and every            ‖
  ‖   pocket-book.                                                   ‖
  ‖                                                                  ‖
  ‖   _Don’t forget the other side, but in case the wrapper is       ‖
  ‖   lost, write to the publishers for a complete catalog._         ‖
  ‖                                                                  ‖
  ‖------------------------------------------------------------------‖
  ‖                _There is a Grosset & Dunlap Book                 ‖
  ‖                for every mood and for every taste_               ‖
  +==================================================================+


=======================================================================
                       THE NOVELS OF VIDA HURST
=======================================================================
 May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap’s list.
=======================================================================

Vida Hurst is recognized as one of the foremost authors of “Romances
of the Modern Girl.” All of her stories have been widely serialized in
newspapers throughout the country and her novels are always in great
demand. There are five stories now available in the Grosset & Dunlap
edition.

  BIG GAME

  The story of a girl who thought love more powerful than
  society—more important even than marriage. A tremendous and
  gripping romance of a girl who dared.

  DIANA

  After a hastened marriage between Diana and Arthur Vane, years
  older and a successful lawyer, Diana soon runs away to New York
  where a terrible experience brings her to her senses.

  THE GREATER LOVE

  A story in which Nancy Gage found after trials and tribulations
  that the superficialities of pride are only surface deep. But that
  true love is everlasting.

  SONIA

  Sonia Marsh goes to San Francisco to seek a new life and a happy
  one but she finds everything is not smooth sailing. After many
  harrowing experiences she finally marries the man she loves.

  SEQUEL TO SONIA

  It continues the life story of Sonia Marsh, who left her small
  town to go to the city, where she falls in love with a Doctor and
  marries him.

=======================================================================
               GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers,_ NEW YORK
=======================================================================


=======================================================================
                       RAFAEL SABATINI’S NOVELS
=======================================================================
 May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset & Dunlap’s list.
=======================================================================

Jesi a diminutive city of the Italian Marches, was the birthplace of
Rafael Sabatini.

He first went to school in Switzerland and from there to Lycee of
Oporto, Portugal, and has never attended an English school. But English
is hardly an adopted language for him, as he learned it from his
mother, an English woman.

Today Rafael Sabatini is regarded as “The Alexandre Dumas of Modern
Fiction.”

  THE LION’S SKIN
  THE SHAME OF MOTLEY
  THE TRAMPLING OF THE LILIES
  THE GATES OF DOOM
  THE STROLLING SAINT
  THE BANNER OF THE BULL
  THE CAROLINIAN
  SAINT MARTIN’S SUMMER
  MISTRESS WILDING
  FORTUNE’S FOOL
  BARDELYS THE MAGNIFICENT
  THE SNARE
  CAPTAIN BLOOD
  THE SEA-HAWK
  SCARAMOUCHE

=======================================================================
               GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers,_ NEW YORK
=======================================================================


=======================================================================
                          ZANE GREY’S NOVELS
=======================================================================
May be had wherever books are sold. Ask for Grosset and Dunlap’s list.
=======================================================================

  UNDER THE TONTO RIM
  TAPPAN’S BURRO
  THE VANISHING AMERICAN
  THE THUNDERING HERD
  THE CALL OF THE CANYON
  WANDERER OF THE WASTELAND
  TO THE LAST MAN
  THE MYSTERIOUS RIDER
  THE MAN OF THE FOREST
  THE DESERT OF WHEAT
  THE U. P. TRAIL
  WILDFIRE
  THE BORDER LEGION
  THE RAINBOW TRAIL
  THE HERITAGE OF THE DESERT
  RIDERS OF THE PURPLE SAGE
  THE LIGHT OF WESTERN STARS
  THE LAST OF THE PLAINSMEN
  THE LONE STAR RANGER
  DESERT GOLD
  BETTY ZANE
  THE DAY OF THE BEAST

                   *       *       *       *       *

LAST OF THE GREAT SCOUTS

The life story of “Buffalo Bill” by his sister Helen Cody Wetmore, with
Foreword and conclusion by Zane Grey.

ZANE GREY’S BOOKS FOR BOYS

  ROPING LIONS IN THE GRAND CANYON
  KEN WARD IN THE JUNGLE
  THE YOUNG LION HUNTER
  THE YOUNG FORESTER
  THE YOUNG PITCHER
  THE SHORT STOP
  THE RED-HEADED OUTFIELD AND OTHER BASEBALL STORIES

=======================================================================
               GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers,_ NEW YORK
=======================================================================


Transcriber’s Notes:

  - Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
  - Blank pages have been removed.
  - Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.
  - In the line "On this particular night our guests were Miss Ganett,
    and Colonel Carter who lives near the church." it is unclear who
	"who lives" refers to, so a comma was added as the simplest change.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MURDER OF ROGER ACKROYD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Murder on the Links
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Murder on the Links

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: February 11, 2019 [eBook #58866]
                Most recently updated: November 30, 2022

Language: English

Credits: Alex Cabal


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MURDER ON THE LINKS ***




cover




The Murder on the Links

by Agatha Christie




TO MY HUSBAND

A fellow enthusiast for detective stories, and to whom I am indebted for much
helpful advice and criticism.




Contents

1 A Fellow Traveller
2 An Appeal for Help
3 At the Villa Geneviève
4 The Letter Signed “Bella”
5 Mrs. Renauld’s Story
6 The Scene of the Crime
7 The Mysterious Madame Daubreuil
8 An Unexpected Meeting
9 M. Giraud Finds Some Clues
10 Gabriel Stonor
11 Jack Renauld
12 Poirot Elucidates Certain Points
13 The Girl with the Anxious Eyes
14 The Second Body
15 A Photograph
16 The Beroldy Case
17 We Make Further Investigations
18 Giraud Acts
19 I Use My Grey Cells
20 An Amazing Statement
21 Hercule Poirot on the Case!
22 I Find Love
23 Difficulties Ahead
24 “Save Him!”
25 An Unexpected Dénouement
26 I Receive a Letter
27 Jack Renauld’s Story
28 Journey’s End




1 A Fellow Traveller

I believe that a well-known anecdote exists to the effect that a young
writer, determined to make the commencement of his story forcible and
original enough to catch and rivet the attention of the most blasé of
editors, penned the following sentence:

“‘Hell!’ said the Duchess.”

Strangely enough, this tale of mine opens in much the same fashion.
Only the lady who gave utterance to the exclamation was not a Duchess!

It was a day in early June. I had been transacting some business in
Paris and was returning by the morning service to London where I was
still sharing rooms with my old friend, the Belgian ex-detective,
Hercule Poirot.

The Calais express was singularly empty—in fact, my own compartment
held only one other traveller. I had made a somewhat hurried departure
from the hotel and was busy assuring myself that I had duly collected
all my traps when the train started. Up till then I had hardly noticed
my companion, but I was now violently recalled to the fact of her
existence. Jumping up from her seat, she let down the window and stuck
her head out, withdrawing it a moment later with the brief and forcible
ejaculation “Hell!”

Now I am old-fashioned. A woman, I consider, should be womanly. I have
no patience with the modern neurotic girl who jazzes from morning to
night, smokes like a chimney, and uses language which would make a
Billingsgate fishwoman blush!

I looked up now, frowning slightly, into a pretty, impudent face,
surmounted by a rakish little red hat. A thick cluster of black curls
hid each ear. I judged that she was little more than seventeen, but her
face was covered with powder, and her lips were quite impossibly
scarlet.

Nothing abashed, she returned my glance, and executed an expressive
grimace.

“Dear me, we’ve shocked the kind gentleman!” she observed to an
imaginary audience. “I apologize for my language! Most unladylike, and
all that, but Oh, Lord, there’s reason enough for it! Do you know I’ve
lost my only sister?”

“Really?” I said politely. “How unfortunate.”

“He disapproves!” remarked the lady. “He disapproves utterly—of me, and
my sister—which last is unfair, because he hasn’t seen her!”

I opened my mouth, but she forestalled me.

“Say no more! Nobody loves me! I shall go into the garden and eat
worms! Boohoo! I am crushed!”

She buried herself behind a large comic French paper. In a minute or
two I saw her eyes stealthily peeping at me over the top. In spite of
myself I could not help smiling, and in a minute she had tossed the
paper aside, and had burst into a merry peal of laughter.

“I knew you weren’t such a mutt as you looked,” she cried.

Her laughter was so infectious that I could not help joining in, though
I hardly cared for the word “mutt.” The girl was certainly all that I
most disliked, but that was no reason why I should make myself
ridiculous by my attitude. I prepared to unbend. After all, she was
decidedly pretty.…

“There! Now we’re friends!” declared the minx. “Say you’re sorry about
my sister—”

“I am desolated!”

“That’s a good boy!”

“Let me finish. I was going to add that, although I am desolated, I can
manage to put up with her absence very well.” I made a little bow.

But this most unaccountable of damsels frowned and shook her head.

“Cut it out. I prefer the ‘dignified disapproval’ stunt. Oh, your face!
‘Not one of us,’ it said. And you were right there—though, mind you,
it’s pretty hard to tell nowadays. It’s not every one who can
distinguish between a demi and a duchess. There now, I believe I’ve
shocked you again! You’ve been dug out of the backwoods, you have. Not
that I mind that. We could do with a few more of your sort. I just hate
a fellow who gets fresh. It makes me mad.”

She shook her head vigorously.

“What are you like when you’re mad?” I inquired with a smile.

“A regular little devil! Don’t care what I say, or what I do, either! I
nearly did a chap in once. Yes, really. He’d have deserved it too.
Italian blood I’ve got. I shall get into trouble one of these days.”

“Well,” I begged, “don’t get mad with me.”

“I shan’t. I like you—did the first moment I set eyes on you. But you
looked so disapproving that I never thought we should make friends.”

“Well, we have. Tell me something about yourself.”

“I’m an actress. No—not the kind you’re thinking of, lunching at the
Savoy covered with jewellery, and with their photograph in every paper
saying how much they love Madame So and So’s face cream. I’ve been on
the boards since I was a kid of six—tumbling.”

“I beg your pardon,” I said puzzled.

“Haven’t you seen child acrobats?”

“Oh, I understand.”

“I’m American born, but I’ve spent most of my life in England. We got a
new show now—”

“We?”

“My sister and I. Sort of song and dance, and a bit of patter, and a
dash of the old business thrown in. It’s quite a new idea, and it hits
them every time. There’s to be money in it—”

My new acquaintance leaned forward, and discoursed volubly, a great
many of her terms being quite unintelligible to me. Yet I found myself
evincing an increasing interest in her. She seemed such a curious
mixture of child and woman. Though perfectly worldly-wise, and able, as
she expressed it, to take care of herself, there was yet something
curiously ingenuous in her single-minded attitude towards life, and her
whole-hearted determination to “make good.” This glimpse of a world
unknown to me was not without its charm, and I enjoyed seeing her vivid
little face light up as she talked.

We passed through Amiens. The name awakened many memories. My companion
seemed to have an intuitive knowledge of what was in my mind.

“Thinking of the War?”

I nodded.

“You were through it, I suppose?”

“Pretty well. I was wounded once, and after the Somme they invalided me
out altogether. I had a half fledged Army job for a bit. I’m a sort of
private secretary now to an M. P.”

“My! That’s brainy!”

“No, it isn’t. There’s really awfully little to do. Usually a couple of
hours every day sees me through. It’s dull work too. In fact, I don’t
know what I should do if I hadn’t got something to fall back upon.”

“Don’t say you collect bugs!”

“No. I share rooms with a very interesting man. He’s a Belgian—an
ex-detective. He’s set up as a private detective in London, and he’s
doing extraordinarily well. He’s really a very marvellous little man.
Time and again he has proved to be right where the official police have
failed.”

My companion listened with widening eyes.

“Isn’t that interesting, now? I just adore crime. I go to all the
mysteries on the movies. And when there’s a murder on I just devour the
papers.”

“Do you remember the Styles Case?” I asked.

“Let me see, was that the old lady who was poisoned? Somewhere down in
Essex?”

I nodded.

“That was Poirot’s first big case. Undoubtedly, but for him, the
murderer would have escaped scot-free. It was a most wonderful bit of
detective work.”

Warming to my subject, I ran over the heads of the affair, working up
to the triumphant and unexpected dénouement. The girl listened
spellbound. In fact, we were so absorbed that the train drew into
Calais station before we realized it.

“My goodness gracious me!” cried my companion. “Where’s my
powder-puff?”

She proceeded to bedaub her face liberally, and then applied a stick of
lip salve to her lips, observing the effect in a small pocket glass,
and betraying not the faintest sign of self-consciousness.

“I say,” I hesitated. “I dare say it’s cheek on my part, but why do all
that sort of thing?”

The girl paused in her operations, and stared at me with undisguised
surprise.

“It isn’t as though you weren’t so pretty that you can afford to do
without it,” I said stammeringly.

“My dear boy! I’ve got to do it. All the girls do. Think I want to look
like a little frump up from the country?” She took one last look in the
mirror, smiled approval, and put it and her vanity-box away in her bag.
“That’s better. Keeping up appearances is a bit of a fag, I grant, but
if a girl respects herself it’s up to her not to let herself get
slack.”

To this essentially moral sentiment, I had no reply. A point of view
makes a great difference.

I secured a couple of porters, and we alighted on the platform. My
companion held out her hand.

“Good-bye, and I’ll mind my language better in future.”

“Oh, but surely you’ll let me look after you on the boat?”

“Mayn’t be on the boat. I’ve got to see whether that sister of mine got
aboard after all anywhere. But thanks all the same.”

“Oh, but we’re going to meet again, surely? I—” I hesitated. “I want to
meet your sister.”

We both laughed.

“That’s real nice of you. I’ll tell her what you say. But I don’t fancy
we’ll meet again. You’ve been very good to me on the journey,
especially after I cheeked you as I did. But what your face expressed
first thing is quite true. I’m not your kind. And that brings
trouble—_I___ know that well enough.…”

Her face changed. For the moment all the light-hearted gaiety died out
of it. It looked angry—revengeful.…

“So good-bye,” she finished, in a lighter tone.

“Aren’t you even going to tell me your name?” I cried, as she turned
away.

She looked over her shoulder. A dimple appeared in each cheek. She was
like a lovely picture by Greuze.

“Cinderella,” she said, and laughed.

But little did I think when and how I should see Cinderella again.




2 An Appeal for Help

It was five minutes past nine when I entered our joint sitting-room for
breakfast on the following morning.

My friend Poirot, exact to the minute as usual, was just tapping the
shell of his second egg.

He beamed upon me as I entered.

“You have slept well, yes? You have recovered from the crossing so
terrible? It is a marvel, almost you are exact this morning.
_Pardon___, but your tie is not symmetrical. Permit that I rearrange
him.”

Elsewhere, I have described Hercule Poirot. An extraordinary little
man! Height, five feet four inches, egg-shaped head carried a little to
one side, eyes that shone green when he was excited, stiff military
moustache, air of dignity immense! He was neat and dandified in
appearance. For neatness of any kind, he had an absolute passion. To
see an ornament set crooked, or a speck of dust, or a slight disarray
in one’s attire, was torture to the little man until he could ease his
feelings by remedying the matter. “Order” and “Method” were his gods.
He had a certain disdain for tangible evidence, such as footprints and
cigarette ash, and would maintain that, taken by themselves, they would
never enable a detective to solve a problem. Then he would tap his
egg-shaped head with absurd complacency, and remark with great
satisfaction: “The true work, it is done from _within___. _The little
grey cells___—remember always the little grey cells, _mon ami!___”

I slipped into my seat, and remarked idly, in answer to Poirot’s
greeting, that an hour’s sea passage from Calais to Dover could hardly
be dignified by the epithet “terrible.”

Poirot waved his egg-spoon in vigorous refutation of my remark.

“_Du tout!___ If for an hour one experiences sensations and emotions of
the most terrible, one has lived many hours! Does not one of your
English poets say that time is counted, not by hours, but by
heart-beats?”

“I fancy Browning was referring to something more romantic than sea
sickness, though.”

“Because he was an Englishman, an Islander to whom _la Manche___ was
nothing. Oh, you English! With _nous autres___ it is different. Figure
to yourself that a lady of my acquaintance at the beginning of the war
fled to Ostend. There she had a terrible crisis of the nerves.
Impossible to escape further except by crossing the sea! And she had a
horror—_mais une horreur!___—of the sea! What was she to do? Daily _les
Boches___ were drawing nearer. Imagine to yourself the terrible
situation!”

“What did she do?” I inquired curiously.

“Fortunately her husband was _homme pratique___. He was also very calm,
the crises of the nerves, they affected him not. _Il l’a emportée
simplement!___ Naturally when she reached England she was prostrate,
but she still breathed.”

Poirot shook his head seriously. I composed my face as best I could.

Suddenly he stiffened and pointed a dramatic finger at the toast rack.

“Ah, par exemple, c’est trop fort!” he cried.

“What is it?”

“This piece of toast. You remark him not?” He whipped the offender out
of the rack, and held it up for me to examine.

“Is it square? No. Is it a triangle? Again no. Is it even round? No. Is
it of any shape remotely pleasing to the eye? What symmetry have we
here? None.”

“It’s cut from a cottage loaf,” I explained soothingly.

Poirot threw me a withering glance.

“What an intelligence has my friend Hastings!” he exclaimed
sarcastically. “Comprehend you not that I have forbidden such a loaf—a
loaf haphazard and shapeless, that no baker should permit himself to
bake!”

I endeavoured to distract his mind.

“Anything interesting come by the post?”

Poirot shook his head with a dissatisfied air.

“I have not yet examined my letters, but nothing of interest arrives
nowadays. The great criminals, the criminals of method, they do not
exist. The cases I have been employed upon lately were _banal___ to the
last degree. In verity I am reduced to recovering lost lap-dogs for
fashionable ladies! The last problem that presented any interest was
that intricate little affair of the Yardly diamond, and that was—how
many months ago, my friend?”

He shook his head despondently, and I roared with laughter.

“Cheer up, Poirot, the luck will change. Open your letters. For all you
know, there may be a great Case looming on the horizon.”

Poirot smiled, and taking up the neat little letter opener with which
he opened his correspondence he slit the tops of the several envelopes
that lay by his plate.

“A bill. Another bill. It is that I grow extravagant in my old age.
Aha! a note from Japp.”

“Yes?” pricked up my ears. The Scotland Yard Inspector had more than
once introduced us to an interesting case.

“He merely thanks me (in his fashion) for a little point in the
Aberystwyth Case on which I was able to set him right. I am delighted
to have been of service to him.”

“How does he thank you?” I asked curiously, for I knew my Japp.

“He is kind enough to say that I am a wonderful sport for my age, and
that he was glad to have had the chance of letting me in on the case.”

This was so typical of Japp, that I could not forbear a chuckle. Poirot
continued to read his correspondence placidly.

“A suggestion that I should give a lecture to our local boy scouts. The
Countess of Forfanock will be obliged if I will call and see her.
Another lap-dog without doubt! And now for the last. Ah—”

I looked up, quick to notice the change of tone. Poirot was reading
attentively. In a minute he tossed the sheet over to me.

“This is out of the ordinary, _mon ami___. Read for yourself.”

The letter was written on a foreign type of paper, in a bold
characteristic hand:

“Villa Geneviève
Merlinville-sur-Mer
France


“_Dear Sir___,
“I am in need of the services of a detective and, for reasons which I
will give you later, do not wish to call in the official police. I have
heard of you from several quarters, and all reports go to show that you
are not only a man of decided ability, but one who also knows how to be
discreet. I do not wish to trust details to the post, but, on account
of a secret I possess, I go in daily fear of my life. I am convinced
that the danger is imminent, and therefore I beg that you will lose no
time in crossing to France. I will send a car to meet you at Calais, if
you will wire me when you are arriving. I shall be obliged if you will
drop all cases you have on hand, and devote yourself solely to my
interests. I am prepared to pay any compensation necessary. I shall
probably need your services for a considerable period of time, as it
may be necessary for you to go out to Santiago, where I spent several
years of my life. I shall be content for you to name your own fee.
    “Assuring you once more that the matter is _urgent___,


“Yours faithfully
“P. T. RENAULD.”


Below the signature was a hastily scrawled line, almost illegible: “For
God’s sake, come!”

I handed the letter back with quickened pulses.

“At last!” I said. “Here is something distinctly out of the ordinary.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Poirot meditatively.

“You will go of course,” I continued.

Poirot nodded. He was thinking deeply. Finally he seemed to make up his
mind, and glanced up at the clock. His face was very grave.

“See you, my friend, there is no time to lose. The Continental express
leaves Victoria at 11 o’clock. Do not agitate yourself. There is plenty
of time. We can allow ten minutes for discussion. You accompany me,
_n’est-ce pas?___”

“Well—”

“You told me yourself that your employer needed you not for the next
few weeks.”

“Oh, that’s all right. But this Mr. Renauld hints strongly that his
business is private.”

“Ta-ta-ta. I will manage M. Renauld. By the way, I seem to know the
name?”

“There’s a well-known South American millionaire fellow. His name’s
Renauld. I don’t know whether it could be the same.”

“But without doubt. That explains the mention of Santiago. Santiago is
in Chile, and Chile it is in South America! Ah, but we progress
finely.”

“Dear me, Poirot,” I said, my excitement rising, “I smell some goodly
shekels in this. If we succeed, we shall make our fortunes!”

“Do not be too sure of that, my friend. A rich man and his money are
not so easily parted. Me, I have seen a well-known millionaire turn out
a tramful of people to seek for a dropped halfpenny.”

I acknowledged the wisdom of this.

“In any case,” continued Poirot, “it is not the money which attracts me
here. Certainly it will be pleasant to have _carte blanche___ in our
investigations; one can be sure that way of wasting no time, but it is
something a little bizarre in this problem which arouses my interest.
You remarked the postscript? How did it strike you?”

I considered.

“Clearly he wrote the letter keeping himself well in hand, but at the
end his self-control snapped and, on the impulse of the moment, he
scrawled those four desperate words.”

But my friend shook his head energetically.

“You are in error. See you not that while the ink of the signature is
nearly black, that of the postscript is quite pale?”

“Well?” I said puzzled.

“_Mon Dieu, mon ami___, but use your little grey cells! Is it not
obvious? M. Renauld wrote his letter. Without blotting it, he reread it
carefully. Then, not on impulse, but deliberately, he added those last
words, and blotted the sheet.”

“But why?”

“_Parbleu!___ so that it should produce the effect upon me that it has
upon you.”

“What?”

“_Mais, oui___—to make sure of my coming! He reread the letter and was
dissatisfied. It was not strong enough!”

He paused, and then added softly, his eyes shining with that green
light that always betokened inward excitement: “And so, _mon ami___,
since that postscript was added, not on impulse, but soberly, in cold
blood, the urgency is very great, and we must reach him as soon as
possible.”

“Merlinville,” I murmured thoughtfully. “I’ve heard of it, I think.”

Poirot nodded.

“It is a quiet little place—but chic! It lies about midway between
Bolougne and Calais. It is rapidly becoming the fashion. Rich English
people who wish to be quiet are taking it up. M. Renauld has a house in
England, I suppose?”

“Yes, in Rutland Gate, as far as I remember. Also a big place in the
country, somewhere in Hertfordshire. But I really know very little
about him, he doesn’t do much in a social way. I believe he has large
South American interests in the City, and has spent most of his life
out in Chile and the Argentino.”

“Well, we shall hear all details from the man himself. Come, let us
pack. A small suit-case each, and then a taxi to Victoria.”

“And the Countess?” I inquired with a smile.

“Ah! _je m’en fiche!___ Her case was certainly not interesting.”

“Why so sure of that?”

“Because in that case she would have come, not written. A woman cannot
wait—always remember that, Hastings.”

Eleven o’clock saw our departure from Victoria on our way to Dover.
Before starting Poirot had despatched a telegram to Mr. Renauld giving
the time of our arrival at Calais. “I’m surprised you haven’t invested
in a few bottles of some sea sick remedy, Poirot,” I observed
maliciously, as I recalled our conversation at breakfast.

My friend, who was anxiously scanning the weather, turned a reproachful
face upon me.

“Is it that you have forgotten the method most excellent of Laverguier?
His system, I practise it always. One balances oneself, if you
remember, turning the head from left to right, breathing in and out,
counting six between each breath.”

“H’m,” I demurred. “You’ll be rather tired of balancing yourself and
counting six by the time you get to Santiago, or Buenos Ayres, or
wherever it is you land.”

“_Quelle idée!___ You do not figure to yourself that I shall go to
Santiago?”

“Mr. Renauld suggests it in his letter.”

“He did not know the methods of Hercule Poirot. I do not run to and
fro, making journeys, and agitating myself. My work is done from
within—_here___—” he tapped his forehead significantly.

As usual, this remark roused my argumentative faculty.

“It’s all very well, Poirot, but I think you are falling into the habit
of despising certain things too much. A finger-print has led sometimes
to the arrest and conviction of a murderer.”

“And has, without doubt, hanged more than one innocent man,” remarked
Poirot dryly.

“But surely the study of finger-prints and footprints, cigarette ash,
different kinds of mud, and other clues that comprise the minute
observation of details—all these are of vital importance?”

“But certainly. I have never said otherwise. The trained observer, the
expert, without doubt he is useful! But the others, the Hercules
Poirots, they are above the experts! To them the experts bring the
facts, their business is the method of the crime, its logical
deduction, the proper sequence and order of the facts; above all, the
true psychology of the case. You have hunted the fox, yes?”

“I have hunted a bit, now and again,” I said, rather bewildered by this
abrupt change of subject. “Why?”

“_Eh bien___, this hunting of the fox, you need the dogs, no?”

“Hounds,” I corrected gently. “Yes, of course.”

“But yet,” Poirot wagged his finger at me. “You did not descend from
your horse and run along the ground smelling with your nose and
uttering loud Ow Ows?”

In spite of myself I laughed immoderately. Poirot nodded in a satisfied
manner.

“So. You leave the work of the d— hounds to the hounds. Yet you demand
that I, Hercule Poirot, should make myself ridiculous by lying down
(possibly on damp grass) to study hypothetical footprints, and should
scoop up cigarette ash when I do not know one kind from the other.
Remember the Plymouth Express mystery. The good Japp departed to make a
survey of the railway line. When he returned, I, without having moved
from my apartments, was able to tell him exactly what he had found.”

“So you are of the opinion that Japp wasted his time.”

“Not at all, since his evidence confirmed my theory. But _I___ should
have wasted my time if _I___ had gone. It is the same with so called
‘experts.’ Remember the handwriting testimony in the Cavendish Case.
One counsel’s questioning brings out testimony as to the resemblances,
the defence brings evidence to show dissimilarity. All the language is
very technical. And the result? What we all knew in the first place.
The writing was very like that of John Cavendish. And the psychological
mind is faced with the question ‘Why?’ Because it was actually his? Or
because some one wished us to think it was his? I answered that
question, _mon ami___, and answered it correctly.”

And Poirot, having effectually silenced, if not convinced me, leaned
back with a satisfied air.

On the boat, I knew better than to disturb my friend’s solitude. The
weather was gorgeous, and the sea as smooth as the proverbial
mill-pond, so I was hardly surprised to hear that Laverguier’s method
had once more justified itself when a smiling Poirot joined me on
disembarking at Calais. A disappointment was in store for us, as no car
had been sent to meet us, but Poirot put this down to his telegram
having been delayed in transit.

“Since it is _carte blanche___, we will hire a car,” he said
cheerfully. And a few minutes later saw us creaking and jolting along,
in the most ramshackle of automobiles that ever plied for hire, in the
direction of Merlinville.

My spirits were at their highest.

“What gorgeous air!” I exclaimed. “This promises to be a delightful
trip.”

“For you, yes. For me, I have work to do, remember, at our journey’s
end.”

“Bah!” I said cheerfully. “You will discover all, ensure this Mr.
Renauld’s safety, run the would-be assassins to earth, and all will
finish in a blaze of glory.”

“You are sanguine, my friend.”

“Yes, I feel absolutely assured of success. Are you not the one and
only Hercule Poirot?”

But my little friend did not rise to the bait. He was observing me
gravely.

“You are what the Scotch people call ‘fey,’ Hastings. It presages
disaster.”

“Nonsense. At any rate, you do not share my feelings.”

“No, but I am afraid.”

“Afraid of what?”

“I do not know. But I have a premonition—a _je ne sais quoi!___”

He spoke so gravely, that I was impressed in spite of myself.

“I have a feeling,” he said slowly, “that this is going to be a big
affair—a long, troublesome problem that will not be easy to work out.”

I would have questioned him further, but we were just coming into the
little town of Merlinville, and we slowed up to inquire the way to the
Villa Geneviève.

“Straight on, monsieur, through the town. The Villa Geneviève is about
half a mile the other side. You cannot miss it. A big Villa,
overlooking the sea.”

We thanked our informant, and drove on, leaving the town behind. A fork
in the road brought us to a second halt. A peasant was trudging towards
us, and we waited for him to come up to us in order to ask the way
again. There was a tiny Villa standing right by the road, but it was
too small and dilapidated to be the one we wanted. As we waited, the
gate of it swung open and a girl came out.

The peasant was passing us now, and the driver leaned forward from his
seat and asked for direction.

“The Villa Geneviève? Just a few steps up this road to the right,
monsieur. You could see it if it were not for the curve.”

The chauffeur thanked him, and started the car again. My eyes were
fascinated by the girl who still stood, with one hand on the gate,
watching us. I am an admirer of beauty, and here was one whom nobody
could have passed without remark. Very tall, with the proportions of a
young goddess, her uncovered golden head gleaming in the sunlight, I
swore to myself that she was one of the most beautiful girls I had ever
seen. As we swung up the rough road, I turned my head to look after
her.

“By Jove, Poirot,” I exclaimed, “did you see that young goddess.”

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

“_Ça commence!___” he murmured. “Already you have seen a goddess!”

“But, hang it all, wasn’t she?”

“Possibly. I did not remark the fact.”

“Surely you noticed her?”

“_Mon ami___, two people rarely see the same thing. You, for instance,
saw a goddess. I—” he hesitated.

“Yes?”

“I saw only a girl with anxious eyes,” said Poirot gravely.

But at that moment we drew up at a big green gate, and, simultaneously,
we both uttered an exclamation. Before it stood an imposing _sergent de
ville___. He held up his hand to bar our way.

“You cannot pass, monsieurs.”

“But we wish to see Mr. Renauld,” I cried. “We have an appointment.
This is his Villa, isn’t it?”

“Yes, monsieur, but—”

Poirot leaned forward.

“But what?”

“M. Renauld was murdered this morning.”




3 At the Villa Geneviève

In a moment Poirot had leapt from the car, his eyes blazing with
excitement. He caught the man by the shoulder.

“What is that you say? Murdered? When? How?”

The _sergent de ville___ drew himself up.

“I cannot answer any questions, monsieur.”

“True. I comprehend.” Poirot reflected for a minute. “The Commissary of
Police, he is without doubt within?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

Poirot took out a card, and scribbled a few words on it.

“_Voilà!___ Will you have the goodness to see that this card is sent in
to the commissary at once?”

The man took it and, turning his head over his shoulder, whistled. In a
few seconds a comrade joined him and was handed Poirot’s message. There
was a wait of some minutes, and then a short stout man with a huge
moustache came bustling down to the gate. The _sergent de ville___
saluted and stood aside.

“My dear M. Poirot,” cried the new-comer, “I am delighted to see you.
Your arrival is most opportune.”

Poirot’s face had lighted up.

“M. Bex! This is indeed a pleasure.” He turned to me. “This is an
English friend of mine, Captain Hastings—M. Lucien Bex.”

The commissary and I bowed to each other ceremoniously, then M. Bex
turned once more to Poirot.

“_Mon vieux___, I have not seen you since 1909, that time in Ostend. I
heard that you had left the Force?”

“So I have. I run a private business in London.”

“And you say you have information to give which may assist us?”

“Possibly you know it already. You were aware that I had been sent
for?”

“No. By whom?”

“The dead man. It seems he knew an attempt was going to be made on his
life. Unfortunately he sent for me too late.”

“_Sacri tonnerre!___” ejaculated the Frenchman. “So he foresaw his own
murder? That upsets our theories considerably! But come inside.”

He held the gate open, and we commenced walking towards the house. M.
Bex continued to talk:

“The examining magistrate, M. Hautet, must hear of this at once. He has
just finished examining the scene of the crime and is about to begin
his interrogations. A charming man. You will like him. Most
sympathetic. Original in his methods, but an excellent judge.”

“When was the crime committed?” asked Poirot.

“The body was discovered this morning about nine o’clock. Madame
Renauld’s evidence, and that of the doctors goes to show that the death
must have occurred about 2 a.m. But enter, I pray of you.”

We had arrived at the steps which led up to the front door of the
Villa. In the hall another _sergent de ville___ was sitting. He rose at
sight of the commissary.

“Where is M. Hautet now?” inquired the latter.

“In the _salon___, monsieur.”

M. Bex opened a door to the left of the hall, and we passed in. M.
Hautet and his clerk were sitting at a big round table. They looked up
as we entered. The commissary introduced us, and explained our
presence.

M. Hautet, the Juge d’Instruction, was a tall, gaunt man, with piercing
dark eyes, and a neatly cut grey beard, which he had a habit of
caressing as he talked. Standing by the mantelpiece was an elderly man,
with slightly stooping shoulders, who was introduced to us as Dr.
Durand.

“Most extraordinary,” remarked M. Hautet, as the commissary finished
speaking. “You have the letter here, monsieur?”

Poirot handed it to him, and the magistrate read it.

“H’m. He speaks of a secret. What a pity he was not more explicit. We
are much indebted to you, M. Poirot. I hope you will do us the honour
of assisting us in our investigations. Or are you obliged to return to
London?”

“M. le juge, I propose to remain. I did not arrive in time to prevent
my client’s death, but I feel myself bound in honour to discover the
assassin.”

The magistrate bowed.

“These sentiments do you honour. Also, without doubt, Madame Renauld
will wish to retain your services. We are expecting M. Giraud from the
Sûreté in Paris any moment, and I am sure that you and he will be able
to give each other mutual assistance in your investigations. In the
meantime, I hope that you will do me the honour to be present at my
interrogations, and I need hardly say that if there is any assistance
you require it is at your disposal.”

“I thank you, monsieur. You will comprehend that at present I am
completely in the dark. I know nothing whatever.”

M. Hautet nodded to the commissary, and the latter took up the tale:

“This morning, the old servant Françoise, on descending to start her
work, found the front door ajar. Feeling a momentary alarm as to
burglars, she looked into the dining-room, but seeing the silver was
safe she thought no more about it, concluding that her master had,
without doubt, risen early, and gone for a stroll.”

“Pardon, monsieur, for interrupting, but was that a common practice of
his?”

“No, it was not, but old Françoise has the common idea as regards the
English—that they are mad, and liable to do the most unaccountable
things at any moment! Going to call her mistress as usual, a younger
maid, Léonie, was horrified to discover her gagged and bound, and
almost at the same moment news was brought that M. Renauld’s body had
been discovered, stone dead, stabbed in the back.”

“Where?”

“That is one of the most extraordinary features of the case. M. Poirot,
the body was lying, face downwards, _in an open grave___.”

“What?”

“Yes. The pit was freshly dug—just a few yards outside the boundary of
the Villa grounds.”

“And he had been dead—how long?”

Dr. Durand answered this.

“I examined the body this morning at ten o’clock. Death must have taken
place at least seven, and possibly ten hours previously.”

“H’m, that fixes it at between midnight and 3 a.m.”

“Exactly, and Madame Renauld’s evidence places it at after 2 a.m. which
narrows the field still further. Death must have been instantaneous,
and naturally could not have been self-inflicted.”

Poirot nodded, and the commissary resumed:

“Madame Renauld was hastily freed from the cords that bound her by the
horrified servants. She was in a terrible condition of weakness, almost
unconscious from the pain of her bonds. It appears that two masked men
entered the bedroom, gagged and bound her, whilst forcibly abducting
her husband. This we know at second hand from the servants. On hearing
the tragic news, she fell at once into an alarming state of agitation.
On arrival, Dr. Durand immediately prescribed a sedative, and we have
not yet been able to question her. But without doubt she will awake
more calm, and be equal to bearing the strain of the interrogation.”

The commissary paused.

“And the inmates of the house, monsieur?”

“There is old Françoise, the housekeeper, she lived for many years with
the former owners of the Villa Geneviève. Then there are two young
girls, sisters, Denise and Léonie Oulard. Their home is in Merlinville,
and they come of the most respectable parents. Then there is the
chauffeur whom M. Renauld brought over from England with him, but he is
away on a holiday. Finally there are Madame Renauld and her son, M.
Jack Renauld. He, too, is away from home at present.”

Poirot bowed his head. M. Hautet spoke:

“Marchaud!”

The _sergent de ville___ appeared.

“Bring in the woman Françoise.”

The man saluted, and disappeared. In a moment or two, he returned,
escorting the frightened Françoise.

“You name is Françoise Arrichet?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“You have been a long time in service at the Villa Geneviève?”

“Eleven years with Madame la Vicomtesse. Then when she sold the Villa
this spring, I consented to remain on with the English milor. Never did
I imagine—”

The magistrate cut her short.

“Without doubt, without doubt. Now, Françoise, in this matter of the
front door, whose business was it to fasten it at night?”

“Mine, monsieur. Always I saw to it myself.”

“And last night?”

“I fastened it as usual.”

“You are sure of that?”

“I swear it by the blessed saints, monsieur.”

“What time would that be?”

“The same time as usual, half-past ten, monsieur.”

“What about the rest of the household, had they gone up to bed?”

“Madame had retired some time before. Denise and Léonie went up with
me. Monsieur was still in his study.”

“Then, if any one unfastened the door afterwards, it must have been M.
Renauld himself?”

Françoise shrugged her broad shoulders.

“What should he do that for? With robbers and assassins passing every
minute! A nice idea! Monsieur was not an imbecile. It is not as though
he had had to let _cette dame___ out—”

The magistrate interrupted sharply:

“_Cette dame?___ What lady do you mean?”

“Why, the lady who came to see him.”

“Had a lady been to see him that evening?”

“But yes, monsieur—and many other evenings as well.”

“Who was she? Did you know her?”

A rather cunning look spread over the woman’s face. “How should I know
who it was?” she grumbled. “I did not let her in last night.”

“Aha!” roared the examining magistrate, bringing his hand down with a
bang on the table. “You would trifle with the police, would you? I
demand that you tell me at once the name of this woman who came to
visit M. Renauld in the evenings.”

“The police—the police,” grumbled Françoise. “Never did I think that I
should be mixed up with the police. But I know well enough who she was.
It was Madame Daubreuil.”

The commissary uttered an exclamation, and leaned forward as though in
utter astonishment.

“Madame Daubreuil—from the Villa Marguerite just down the road?”

“That is what I said, monsieur. Oh, she is a pretty one, _cellela!___”
The old woman tossed her head scornfully.

“Madame Daubreuil,” murmured the commissary. “Impossible.”

“_Voilà,___” grumbled Françoise. “That is all you get for telling the
truth.”

“Not at all,” said the examining magistrate soothingly. “We were
surprised, that is all. Madame Daubreuil then, and Monsieur Renauld,
they were—” he paused delicately. “Eh? It was that without doubt?”

“How should I know? But what will you? Monsieur, he was _milor
anglais___—_trés riche___—and Madame Daubreuil, she was poor, that
one—and _trés chic___ for all that she lives so quietly with her
daughter. Not a doubt of it, she has had her history! She is no longer
young, but _ma foi!___ I who speak to you have seen the men’s heads
turn after her as she goes down the street. Besides lately, she has had
more money to spend—all the town knows it. The little economies, they
are at an end.” And Françoise shook her head with an air of unalterable
certainty.

M. Hautet stroked his beard reflectively.

“And Madame Renauld?” he asked at length. “How did she take
this—friendship.”

Françoise shrugged her shoulders.

“She was always most amiable—most polite. One would say that she
suspected nothing. But all the same, is it not so, the heart suffers,
monsieur? Day by day, I have watched Madame grow paler and thinner. She
was not the same woman who arrived here a month ago. Monsieur, too, has
changed. He also has had his worries. One could see that he was on the
brink of a crisis of the nerves. And who could wonder, with an affair
conducted such a fashion? No reticence, no discretion. _Style
anglais___, without doubt!”

I bounded indignantly in my seat, but the examining magistrate was
continuing his questions, undistracted by side issues.

“You say that M. Renauld had not to let Madame Daubreuil out? Had she
left, then?”

“Yes, monsieur. I heard them come out of the study and go to the door.
Monsieur said good night, and shut the door after her.”

“What time was that?”

“About twenty-five minutes after ten, monsieur.”

“Do you know when M. Renauld went to bed?”

“I heard him come up about ten minutes after we did. The stair creaks
so that one hears every one who goes up and down.”

“And that is all? You heard no sound of disturbance during the night?”

“Nothing whatever, monsieur.”

“Which of the servants came down the first in the morning?”

“I did, monsieur. At once I saw the door swinging open.”

“What about the other downstairs windows, were they all fastened?”

“Every one of them. There was nothing suspicious or out of place
anywhere.”

“Good, Françoise, you can go.”

The old woman shuffled towards the door. On the threshold she looked
back.

“I will tell you one thing, monsieur. That Madame Daubreuil she is a
bad one! Oh, yes, one woman knows about another. She is a bad one,
remember that.” And, shaking her head sagely, Françoise left the room.

“Léonie Oulard,” called the magistrate.

Léonie appeared dissolved in tears, and inclined to be hysterical. M.
Hautet dealt with her adroitly. Her evidence was mainly concerned with
the discovery of her mistress gagged and bound, of which she gave
rather an exaggerated account. She, like Françoise, had heard nothing
during the night.

Her sister, Denise, succeeded her. She agreed that her master had
changed greatly of late.

“Every day he became more and more morose. He ate less. He was always
depressed.” But Denise had her own theory. “Without doubt it was the
Mafia he had on his track! Two masked men—who else could it be? A
terrible society that!”

“It is, of course, possible,” said the magistrate smoothly. “Now, my
girl, was it you who admitted Madame Daubreuil to the house last
night?”

“Not _last___ night, monsieur, the night before.”

“But Françoise has just told us that Madame Daubreuil was here last
night?”

“No, monsieur. A lady _did___ come to see M. Renauld last night, but it
was not Madame Daubreuil.”

Surprised, the magistrate insisted, but the girl held firm. She knew
Madame Daubreuil perfectly by sight. This lady was dark also, but
shorter, and much younger. Nothing could shake her statement.

“Had you ever seen this lady before?”

“Never, monsieur.” And then the girl added diffidently: “But I think
she was English.”

“English?”

“Yes, monsieur. She asked for M. Renauld in quite good French, but the
accent—one can always tell it, _n’est-ce pas?___ Besides when they came
out of the study they were speaking in English.”

“Did you hear what they said? Could you understand it, I mean?”

“Me, I speak the English very well,” said Denise with pride. “The lady
was speaking too fast for me to catch what she said, but I heard
Monsieur’s last words as he opened the door for her.” She paused, and
then repeated carefully and laboriously:

“‘Yeas—yeas—butt for Gaud’s saike go nauw!’”

“Yes, yes, but for God’s sake go now!” repeated the magistrate.

He dismissed Denise and, after a moment or two for consideration,
recalled Françoise. To her he propounded the question as to whether she
had not made a mistake in fixing the night of Madame Daubreuil’s visit.
Françoise, however, proved unexpectedly obstinate. It was last night
that Madame Daubreuil had come. Without a doubt it was she. Denise
wished to make herself interesting, _voilà tout!___ So she had cooked
up this fine tale about a strange lady. Airing her knowledge of English
too! Probably Monsieur had never spoken that sentence in English at
all, and even if he had, it proved nothing, for Madame Daubreuil spoke
English perfectly, and generally used that language when talking to M.
and Madame Renauld. “You see, M. Jack, the son of Monsieur, was usually
here, and he spoke the French very badly.”

The magistrate did not insist. Instead he inquired about the chauffeur,
and learned that only yesterday, M. Renauld had declared that he was
not likely to use the car, and that Masters might just as well take a
holiday.

A perplexed frown was beginning to gather between Poirot’s eyes.

“What is it?” I whispered.

He shook his head impatiently, and asked a question:

“Pardon, M. Bex, but without doubt M. Renauld could drive the car
himself?”

The commissary looked over at Françoise, and the old woman replied
promptly:

“No, Monsieur did not drive himself.”

Poirot’s frown deepened.

“I wish you would tell me what is worrying you,” I said impatiently.

“See you not? In his letter M. Renauld speaks of sending the car for me
to Calais.”

“Perhaps he meant a hired car,” I suggested.

“Doubtless that is so. But why hire a car when you have one of your
own. Why choose yesterday to send away the chauffeur on a
holiday—suddenly, at a moment’s notice? Was it that for some reason he
wanted him out of the way before we arrived?”




4 The Letter Signed “Bella”

Françoise had left the room. The magistrate was drumming thoughtfully
on the table.

“M. Bex,” he said at length, “here we have directly conflicting
testimony. Which are we to believe, Françoise or Denise?”

“Denise,” said the commissary decidedly. “It was she who let the
visitor in. Françoise is old and obstinate, and has evidently taken a
dislike to Madame Daubreuil. Besides, our own knowledge tends to show
that Renauld was entangled with another woman.”

“_Tiens!___” cried M. Hautet. “We have forgotten to inform M. Poirot of
that.” He searched amongst the papers on the table, and finally handed
the one he was in search of to my friend. “This letter, M. Poirot, we
found in the pocket of the dead man’s overcoat.”

Poirot took it and unfolded it. It was somewhat worn and crumbled, and
was written in English in a rather unformed hand:

“_My dearest one:___”
Why have you not written for so long? You do love me still, don’t you?
Your letters lately have been so different, cold and strange, and now
this long silence. It makes me afraid. If you were to stop loving me!
But that’s impossible—what a silly kid I am—always imagining things!
But if you _did___ stop loving me, I don’t know what I should do—kill
myself perhaps! I couldn’t live without you. Sometimes I fancy another
woman is coming between us. Let her look out, that’s all—and you too!
I’d as soon kill you as let her have you! I mean it.
    “But there, I’m writing high-flown nonsense. You love me, and I
    love you—yes, love you, love you, love you!


“Your own adoring
“BELLA.”


There was no address or date. Poirot handed it back with a grave face.

“And the assumption is, M. le juge—?”

The examining magistrate shrugged his shoulders.

“Obviously M. Renauld was entangled with this Englishwoman—Bella. He
comes over here, meets Madame Daubreuil, and starts an intrigue with
her. He cools off to the other, and she instantly suspects something.
This letter contains a distinct threat. M. Poirot, at first sight the
case seemed simplicity itself. Jealousy! The fact that M. Renauld was
stabbed in the back seemed to point distinctly to its being a woman’s
crime.”

Poirot nodded.

“The stab in the back, yes—but not the grave! That was laborious work,
hard work—no woman dug that grave, monsieur. That was a man’s doing.”

The commissary exclaimed excitedly: “Yes, yes, you are right. We did
not think of that.”

“As I said,” continued M. Hautet, “at first sight the case seemed
simple, but the masked men, and the letter you received from M. Renauld
complicate matters. Here we seem to have an entirely different set of
circumstances, with no relationship between the two. As regards the
letter written to yourself, do you think it is possible that it
referred in any way to this ‘Bella,’ and her threats?”

Poirot shook his head.

“Hardly. A man like M. Renauld, who has led an adventurous life in
out-of-the-way places, would not be likely to ask for protection
against a woman.”

The examining magistrate nodded his head emphatically.

“My view exactly. Then we must look for the explanation of the letter—”

“In Santiago,” finished the commissary. “I shall cable without delay to
the police in that city, requesting full details of the murdered man’s
life out there, his love affairs, his business transactions, his
friendships, and any enmities he may have incurred. It will be strange
if, after that, we do not hold a clue to his mysterious murder.”

The commissary looked round for approval.

“Excellent,” said Poirot appreciatively.

“His wife, too, may be able to give us a pointer,” added the
magistrate.

“You have found no other letters from this Bella amongst M. Renauld’s
effects?” asked Poirot.

“No. Of course one of our first proceedings was to search through his
private papers in the study. We found nothing of interest, however. All
seemed square and above-board. The only thing at all out of the
ordinary was his will. Here it is.”

Poirot ran through the document.

“So. A legacy of a thousand pounds to Mr. Stonor—who is he, by the
way?”

“M. Renauld’s secretary. He remained in England, but was over here once
or twice for a week-end.”

“And everything else left unconditionally to his beloved wife, Eloise.
Simply drawn up, but perfectly legal. Witnessed by the two servants,
Denise and Françoise. Nothing so very unusual about that.” He handed it
back.

“Perhaps,” began Bex, “you did not notice—”

“The date?” twinkled Poirot. “But yes, I noticed it. A fortnight ago.
Possibly it marks his first intimation of danger. Many rich men die
intestate through never considering the likelihood of their demise. But
it is dangerous to draw conclusions prematurely. It points, however, to
his having a real liking and fondness for his wife, in spite of his
amorous intrigues.”

“Yes,” said M. Hautet doubtfully. “But it is possibly a little unfair
on his son, since it leaves him entirely dependent on his mother. If
she were to marry again, and her second husband obtained an ascendancy
over her, this boy might never touch a penny of his father’s money.”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Man is a vain animal. M. Renauld figured to himself, without doubt,
that his widow would never marry again. As to the son, it may have been
a wise precaution to leave the money in his mother’s hands. The sons of
rich men are proverbially wild.”

“It may be as you say. Now, M. Poirot, you would without doubt like to
visit the scene of the crime. I am sorry that the body has been
removed, but of course photographs have been taken from every
conceivable angle, and will be at your disposal as soon as they are
available.”

“I thank you, monsieur, for all your courtesy.”

The commissary rose.

“Come with me, monsieurs.”

He opened the door, and bowed ceremoniously to Poirot to precede him.
Poirot, with equal politeness, drew back and bowed to the commissary.

“Monsieur.”

“Monsieur.”

At last they got out into the hall.

“That room there, it is the study, _hein?___” asked Poirot suddenly,
nodding towards the door opposite.

“Yes. You would like to see it?” He threw the door open as he spoke,
and we entered.

The room which M. Renauld had chosen for his own particular use was
small, but furnished with great taste and comfort. A businesslike
writing desk, with many pigeon holes, stood in the window. Two large
leather-covered armchairs faced the fireplace, and between them was a
round table covered with the latest books and magazines. Bookshelves
lined two of the walls, and at the end of the room opposite the window
there was a handsome oak sideboard with a tantalus on top. The curtains
and _portière___ were of a soft dull green, and the carpet matched them
in tone.

Poirot stood a moment taking in the room, then he stepped forward,
passed his hand lightly over the backs of the leather chairs, picked up
a magazine from the table, and drew a finger gingerly over the surface
of the oak sideboard. His face expressed complete approval.

“No dust?” I asked, with a smile.

He beamed on me, appreciative of my knowledge of his peculiarities.

“Not a particle, _mon ami!___ And for once, perhaps, it is a pity.”

His sharp, birdlike eyes darted here and there.

“Ah!” he remarked suddenly, with an intonation of relief. “The
hearth-rug is crooked,” and he bent down to straighten it.

Suddenly he uttered an exclamation and rose. In his hand he held a
small fragment of paper.

“In France, as in England,” he remarked, “the domestics omit to sweep
under the mats!”

Bex took the fragment from him, and I came closer to examine it.

“You recognize it—eh, Hastings?”

I shook my head, puzzled—and yet that particular shade of pink paper
was very familiar.

The commissary’s mental processes were quicker than mine.

“A fragment of a cheque,” he exclaimed.

The piece of paper was roughly about two inches square. On it was
written in ink the word “Duveen.”

“_Bien___,” said Bex. “This cheque was payable to, or drawn by, one
named Duveen.”

“The former, I fancy,” said Poirot, “for, if I am not mistaken, the
handwriting is that of M. Renauld.”

That was soon established, by comparing it with a memorandum from the
desk.

“Dear me,” murmured the commissary, with a crestfallen air, “I really
cannot imagine how I came to overlook this.”

Poirot laughed.

“The moral of that is, always look under the mats! My friend Hastings
here will tell you that anything in the least crooked is a torment to
me. As soon as I saw that the hearth-rug was out of the straight, I
said to myself: ‘_Tiens!___ The leg of the chair caught it in being
pushed back. Possibly there may be something beneath it which the good
Françoise overlooked.’”

“Françoise?”

“Or Denise, or Léonie. Whoever did this room. Since there is no dust,
the room _must___ have been done this morning. I reconstruct the
incident like this. Yesterday, possibly last night, M. Renauld drew a
cheque to the order of some one named Duveen. Afterwards it was torn
up, and scattered on the floor. This morning—” But M. Bex was already
pulling impatiently at the bell.

Françoise answered it. Yes, there had been a lot of pieces of paper on
the floor. What had she done with them? Put them in the kitchen stove
of course! What else?

With a gesture of despair, Bex dismissed her. Then, his face
lightening, he ran to the desk. In a minute he was hunting through the
dead man’s cheque book. Then he repeated his former gesture. The last
counterfoil was blank.

“Courage!” cried Poirot, clapping him on the back. “Without doubt,
Madame Renauld will be able to tell us all about this mysterious person
named Duveen.”

The commissary’s face cleared. “That is true. Let us proceed.”

As we turned to leave the room, Poirot remarked casually: “It was here
that M. Renauld received his guest last night, eh?”

“It was—but how did you know?”

“By _this___. I found it on the back of the leather chair.”

And he held up between his finger and thumb a long black hair—a woman’s
hair!

M. Bex took us out by the back of the house to where there was a small
shed leaning against the house. He produced a key from his pocket and
unlocked it.

“The body is here. We moved it from the scene of the crime just before
you arrived, as the photographers had done with it.”

He opened the door and we passed in. The murdered man lay on the
ground, with a sheet over him. M. Bex dexterously whipped off the
covering. Renauld was a man of medium height, slender and lithe in
figure. He looked about fifty years of age, and his dark hair was
plentifully streaked with grey. He was clean shaven with a long thin
nose, and eyes set rather close together, and his skin was deeply
bronzed, as that of a man who had spent most of his life beneath
tropical skies. His lips were drawn back from his teeth and an
expression of absolute amazement and terror was stamped on the livid
features.

“One can see by his face that he was stabbed in the back,” remarked
Poirot.

Very gently, he turned the dead man over. There, between the
shoulder-blades, staining the light fawn overcoat, was a round dark
patch. In the middle of it there was a slit in the cloth. Poirot
examined it narrowly.

“Have you any idea with what weapon the crime was committed?”

“It was left in the wound.” The commissary reached down a large glass
jar. In it was a small object that looked to me more like a paper-knife
than anything else. It had a black handle, and a narrow shining blade.
The whole thing was not more than ten inches long. Poirot tested the
discoloured point gingerly with his finger tip.

“_Ma foi!___ but it is sharp! A nice easy little tool for murder!”

“Unfortunately, we could find no trace of fingerprints on it,” remarked
Bex regretfully. “The murderer must have worn gloves.”

“Of course he did,” said Poirot contemptuously. “Even in Santiago they
know enough for that. The veriest amateur of an English Mees knows
it—thanks to the publicity the Bertillon system has been given in the
Press. All the same, it interests me very much that there were no
finger-prints. It is so amazingly simple to leave the finger-prints of
some one else! And then the police are happy.” He shook his head. “I
very much fear our criminal is not a man of method—either that or he
was pressed for time. But we shall see.”

He let the body fall back into its original position.

“He wore only underclothes under his overcoat, I see,” he remarked.

“Yes, the examining magistrate thinks that is rather a curious point.”

At this minute there was a tap on the door which Bex had closed after
him. He strode forward and opened it. Françoise was there. She
endeavoured to peep in with ghoulish curiosity.

“Well, what is it?” demanded Bex impatiently.

“Madame. She sends a message that she is much recovered, and is quite
ready to receive the examining magistrate.”

“Good,” said M. Bex briskly. “Tell M. Hautet and say that we will come
at once.”

Poirot lingered a moment, looking back towards the body. I thought for
a moment that he was going to apostrophize it, to declare aloud his
determination never to rest till he had discovered the murderer. But
when he spoke, it was tamely and awkwardly, and his comment was
ludicrously inappropriate to the solemnity of the moment.

“He wore his overcoat very long,” he said constrainedly.




5 Mrs. Renauld’s Story

We found M. Hautet awaiting us in the hall, and we all proceeded
upstairs together, Françoise marching ahead to show us the way. Poirot
went up in a zigzag fashion which puzzled me, until he whispered with a
grimace:

“No wonder the servants heard M. Renauld mounting the stairs; not a
board of them but creaks fit to wake the dead!”

At the head of the staircase, a small passage branched off.

“The servants’ quarters,” explained Bex.

We continued along a corridor, and Françoise tapped on the last door to
the right of it.

A faint voice bade us enter, and we passed into a large sunny apartment
looking out towards the sea, which showed blue and sparkling about a
quarter of a mile distant.

On a couch, propped up with cushions, and attended by Dr. Durand, lay a
tall, striking-looking woman. She was middle-aged, and her once dark
hair was now almost entirely silvered, but the intense vitality and
strength of her personality would have made itself felt anywhere. You
knew at once that you were in the presence of what the French call
“_une maitresse femme___.”

She greeted us with a dignified inclination of the head.

“Pray be seated, monsieurs.”

We took chairs, and the magistrate’s clerk established himself at a
round table.

“I hope, madame,” began M. Hautet, “that it will not distress you
unduly to relate to us what occurred last night?”

“Not at all, monsieur. I know the value of time, if these scoundrelly
assassins are to be caught and punished.”

“Very well, madame. It will fatigue you less, I think, if I ask you
questions and you confine yourself to answering them. At what time did
you go to bed last night?”

“At half-past nine, monsieur. I was tired.”

“And your husband?”

“About an hour later, I fancy.”

“Did he seem disturbed—upset in any way?”

“No, not more than usual.”

“What happened then?”

“We slept. I was awakened by a hand being pressed over my mouth. I
tried to scream out, but the hand prevented me. There were two men in
the room. They were both masked.”

“Can you describe them at all, madame?”

“One was very tall, and had a long black beard, the other was short and
stout. His beard was reddish. They both wore hats pulled down over
their eyes.”

“H’m,” said the magistrate thoughtfully, “too much beard, I fear.”

“You mean they were false?”

“Yes, madame. But continue your story.”

“It was the short man who was holding me. He forced a gag into my
mouth, and then bound me with rope hand and foot. The other man was
standing over my husband. He had caught up my little dagger paper-knife
from the dressing-table and was holding it with the point just over his
heart. When the short man had finished with me, he joined the other,
and they forced my husband to get up and accompany them into the
dressing-room next door. I was nearly fainting with terror,
nevertheless I listened desperately.

“They were speaking in too low a tone for me to hear what they said.
But I recognized the language, a bastard Spanish such as is spoken in
some parts of South America. They seemed to be demanding something from
my husband, and presently they grew angry, and their voices rose a
little. I think the tall man was speaking. ‘You know what we want!’ he
said. ‘_The secret!___ Where is it?’ I do not know what my husband
answered, but the other replied fiercely: ‘You lie! We know you have
it. Where are your keys?’

“Then I heard sounds of drawers being pulled out. There is a safe on
the wall of my husband’s dressing-room in which he always keeps a
fairly large amount of ready money. Léonie tells me this has been
rifled and the money taken, but evidently what they were looking for
was not there, for presently I heard the tall man, with an oath,
command my husband to dress himself. Soon after that, I think some
noise in the house must have disturbed them, for they hustled my
husband out into my room only half dressed.”

“_Pardon___,” interrupted Poirot, “but is there then no other egress
from the dressing-room?”

“No, monsieur, there is only the communicating door into my room. They
hurried my husband through, the short man in front, and the tall man
behind him with the dagger still in his hand. Paul tried to break away
to come to me. I saw his agonized eyes. He turned to his captors. ‘I
must speak to her,’ he said. Then, coming to the side of the bed, ‘It
is all right, Eloise,’ he said. ‘Do not be afraid. I shall return
before morning.’ But, although he tried to make his voice confident, I
could see the terror in his eyes. Then they hustled him out of the
door, the tall man saying: ‘One sound—and you are a dead man,
remember.’

“After that,” continued Mrs. Renauld, “I must have fainted. The next
thing I recollect is Léonie rubbing my wrists, and giving me brandy.”

“Madame Renauld,” said the magistrate, “had you any idea what it was
for which the assassins were searching?”

“None whatever, monsieur.”

“Had you any knowledge that your husband feared something?”

“Yes. I had seen the change in him.”

“How long ago was that?”

Mrs. Renauld reflected.

“Ten days perhaps.”

“Not longer?”

“Possibly. I only noticed it then.”

“Did you question your husband at all as to the cause?”

“Once. He put me off evasively. Nevertheless, I was convinced that he
was suffering some terrible anxiety. However, since he evidently wished
to conceal the fact from me, I tried to pretend that I had noticed
nothing.”

“Were you aware that he had called in the services of a detective?”

“A detective?” exclaimed Mrs. Renauld, very much surprised.

“Yes, this gentleman—M. Hercule Poirot.” Poirot bowed. “He arrived
today in response to a summons from your husband.” And taking the
letter written by M. Renauld from his pocket he handed it to the lady.

She read it with apparently genuine astonishment.

“I had no idea of this. Evidently he was fully cognizant of the
danger.”

“Now, madame, I will beg of you to be frank with me. Is there any
incident in your husband’s past life in South America which might throw
light on his murder?”

Mrs. Renauld reflected deeply, but at last shook her head.

“I can think of none. Certainly my husband had many enemies, people he
had got the better of in some way or another, but I can think of no one
distinctive case. I do not say there is no such incident—only that I am
not aware of it.”

The examining magistrate stroked his beard disconsolately.

“And you can fix the time of this outrage?”

“Yes, I distinctly remember hearing the clock on the mantelpiece strike
two.” She nodded towards an eight-day travelling clock in a leather
case which stood in the centre of the chimney-piece.

Poirot rose from his seat, scrutinized the clock carefully, and nodded,
satisfied.

“And here too,” exclaimed M. Bex, “is a wrist watch, knocked off the
dressing-table by the assassins, without doubt, and smashed to atoms.
Little did they know it would testify against them.”

Gently he picked away the fragments of broken glass. Suddenly his face
changed to one of utter stupefaction.

“_Mon Dieu!___” he ejaculated.

“What is it?”

“The hands of the watch point to seven o’clock!”

“What?” cried the examining magistrate, astonished.

But Poirot, deft as ever, took the broken trinket from the startled
commissary, and held it to his ear. Then he smiled.

“The glass is broken, yes, but the watch itself is still going.”

The explanation of the mystery was greeted with a relieved smile. But
the magistrate bethought him of another point.

“But surely it is not seven o’clock now?”

“No,” said Poirot gently, “it is a few minutes after five. Possibly the
watch gains, is that so, madame?”

Mrs. Renauld was frowning perplexedly.

“It does gain,” she admitted, “but I’ve never known it to gain quite so
much as that.”

With a gesture of impatience, the magistrate left the matter of the
watch and proceeded with his interrogatory.

“Madame, the front door was found ajar. It seems almost certain that
the murderers entered that way, yet it has not been forced at all. Can
you suggest any explanation?”

“Possibly my husband went out for a stroll the last thing, and forgot
to latch it when he came in.”

“Is that a likely thing to happen?”

“Very. My husband was the most absent-minded of men.”

There was a slight frown on her brow as she spoke, as though this trait
in the dead man’s character had at times vexed her.

“There is one inference I think we might draw,” remarked the commissary
suddenly. “Since the men insisted on M. Renauld dressing himself, it
looks as though the place they were taking him to, the place where ‘the
secret’ was concealed, lay some distance away.”

The magistrate nodded.

“Yes, far, and yet not too far, since he spoke of being back by
morning.”

“What times does the last train leave the station of Merlinville?”
asked Poirot.

“Eleven-fifty one way, and 12:17 the other, but it is more probable
that they had a motor waiting.”

“Of course,” agreed Poirot, looking somewhat crestfallen.

“Indeed, that might be one way of tracing them,” continued the
magistrate, brightening. “A motor containing two foreigners is quite
likely to have been noticed. That is an excellent point, M. Bex.”

He smiled to himself, and then, becoming grave once more, he said to
Mrs. Renauld:

“There is another question. Do you know any one of the name of
‘Duveen’?”

“Duveen?” Mrs. Renauld repeated, thoughtfully. “No, for the moment, I
cannot say I do.”

“You have never heard your husband mention any one of that name?”

“Never.”

“Do you know any one whose Christian name is Bella?”

He watched Mrs. Renauld narrowly as he spoke, seeking to surprise any
signs of anger or consciousness, but she merely shook her head in quite
a natural manner. He continued his questions.

“Are you aware that your husband had a visitor last night?”

Now he saw the red mount slightly in her cheeks, but she replied
composedly.

“No, who was that?”

“A lady.”

“Indeed?”

But for the moment the magistrate was content to say no more. It seemed
unlikely that Madame Daubreuil had any connection with the crime, and
he was anxious not to upset Mrs. Renauld more than necessary.

He made a sign to the commissary, and the latter replied with a nod.
Then rising, he went across the room, and returned with the glass jar
we had seen in the outhouse in his hand. From this, he took the dagger.

“Madame,” he said gently, “do you recognize this?”

She gave a little cry.

“Yes, that is my little dagger.” Then—she saw the stained point, and
she drew back, her eyes widening with horror. “Is that—blood?”

“Yes, madame. Your husband was killed with this weapon.” He removed it
hastily from sight. “You are quite sure about it’s being the one that
was on your dressing-table last night?”

“Oh, yes. It was a present from my son. He was in the Air Force during
the War. He gave his age as older than it was.” There was a touch of
the proud mother in her voice. “This was made from a streamline
aeroplane wire, and was given to me by my son as a souvenir of the
War.”

“I see, madame. That brings us to another matter. Your son, where is he
now? It is necessary that he should be telegraphed to without delay.”

“Jack? He is on his way to Buenos Ayres.”

“What?”

“Yes. My husband telegraphed to him yesterday. He had sent him on
business to Paris, but yesterday he discovered that it would be
necessary for him to proceed without delay to South America. There was
a boat leaving Cherbourg for Buenos Ayres last night, and he wired him
to catch it.”

“Have you any knowledge of what the business in Buenos Ayres was?”

“No, monsieur, I know nothing of its nature, but Buenos Ayres is not my
son’s final destination. He was going overland from there to Santiago.”

And, in unison, the magistrate and the commissary exclaimed:

“Santiago! Again Santiago!”

It was at this moment, when we were all stunned by the mention of that
word, that Poirot approached Mrs. Renauld. He had been standing by the
window like a man lost in a dream, and I doubt if he had fully taken in
what had passed. He paused by the lady’s side with a bow.

“_Pardon___, madame, but may I examine your wrists.”

Though slightly surprised at the request, Mrs. Renauld held them out to
him. Round each of them was a cruel red mark where the cords had bitten
into the flesh. As he examined them, I fancied that a momentary flicker
of excitement I had seen in his eyes disappeared.

“They must cause you great pain,” he said, and once more he looked
puzzled.

But the magistrate was speaking excitedly.

“Young M. Renauld must be communicated with at once by wireless. It is
vital that we should know anything he can tell us about this trip to
Santiago.” He hesitated. “I hoped he might have been near at hand, so
that we could have saved you pain, madame.” He paused.

“You mean,” she said in a low voice, “the identification of my
husband’s body?”

The magistrate bowed his head.

“I am a strong woman, monsieur. I can bear all that is required of me.
I am ready—now.”

“Oh, tomorrow will be quite soon enough, I assure you—”

“I prefer to get it over,” she said in a low tone, a spasm of pain
crossing her face. “If you will be so good as to give me your arm,
Doctor?”

The doctor hastened forward, a cloak was thrown over Mrs. Renauld’s
shoulders, and a slow procession went down the stairs. M. Bex hurried
on ahead to open the door of the shed. In a minute or two Mrs. Renauld
appeared in the doorway. She was very pale, but resolute. Behind her,
M. Hautet was clacking commiserations and apologies like an animated
hen.

She raised her hand to her face.

“A moment, messieurs, while I steel myself.”

She took her hand away and looked down at the dead man. Then the
marvellous self-control which had upheld her so far deserted her.

“Paul!” she cried. “Husband! Oh, God!” And pitching forward she fell
unconscious to the ground.

Instantly Poirot was beside her, he raised the lid of her eye, felt her
pulse. When he had satisfied himself that she had really fainted, he
drew aside. He caught me by the arm.

“I am an imbecile, my friend! If ever there was love and grief in a
woman’s voice, I heard it then. My little idea was all wrong. _Eh
bien!___ I must start again!”




6 The Scene of the Crime

Between them, the doctor and M. Hautet carried the unconscious woman
into the house. The commissary looked after them, shaking his head.

“_Pauvre femme___,” he murmured to himself. “The shock was too much for
her. Well, well, we can do nothing. Now, M. Poirot, shall we visit the
place where the crime was committed?”

“If you please, M. Bex.”

We passed through the house, and out by the front door. Poirot had
looked up at the staircase in passing, and shook his head in a
dissatisfied manner.

“It is to me incredible that the servants heard nothing. The creaking
of that staircase, with _three___ people descending it, would awaken
the dead!”

“It was the middle of the night, remember. They were sound asleep by
then.”

But Poirot continued to shake his head as though not fully accepting
the explanation. On the sweep of the drive, he paused, looking up at
the house.

“What moved them in the first place to try if the front door were open?
It was a most unlikely thing that it should be. It was far more
probable that they should at once try to force a window.”

“But all the windows on the ground floor are barred with iron
shutters,” objected the commissary.

Poirot pointed to a window on the first floor.

“That is the window of the bedroom we have just come from, is it not?
And see—there is a tree by which it would be the easiest thing in the
world to mount.”

“Possibly,” admitted the other. “But they could not have done so
without leaving footprints in the flower-bed.”

I saw the justice of his words. There were two large oval flower-beds
planted with scarlet geraniums, one each side of the steps leading up
to the front door. The tree in question had its roots actually at the
back of the bed itself, and it would have been impossible to reach it
without stepping on the bed.

“You see,” continued the commissary, “owing to the dry weather no
prints would show on the drive or paths; but, on the soft mould of the
flower-bed, it would have been a very different affair.”

Poirot went close to the bed and studied it attentively. As Bex had
said, the mould was perfectly smooth. There was not an indentation on
it anywhere.

Poirot nodded, as though convinced, and we turned away, but he suddenly
darted off and began examining the other flower-bed.

“M. Bex!” he called. “See here. Here are plenty of traces for you.”

The commissary joined him—and smiled.

“My dear M. Poirot, those are without doubt the footprints of the
gardener’s large hobnailed boots. In any case, it would have no
importance, since this side we have no tree, and consequently no means
of gaining access to the upper story.”

“True,” said Poirot, evidently crestfallen. “So you think these
footprints are of no importance?”

“Not the least in the world.”

Then, to my utter astonishment, Poirot pronounced these words:

“I do not agree with you. I have a little idea that these footprints
are the most important things we have seen yet.”

M. Bex said nothing, merely shrugged his shoulders. He was far too
courteous to utter his real opinion.

“Shall we proceed?” he asked instead.

“Certainly. I can investigate this matter of the footprints later,”
said Poirot cheerfully.

Instead of following the drive down to the gate, M. Bex turned up a
path that branched off at right angles. It led, up a slight incline,
round to the right of the house, and was bordered on either side by a
kind of shrubbery. Suddenly it emerged into a little clearing from
which one obtained a view of the sea. A seat had been placed here, and
not far from it was a rather ramshackle shed. A few steps further on, a
neat line of small bushes marked the boundary of the Villa grounds. M.
Bex pushed his way through these and we found ourselves on a wide
stretch of open downs. I looked round, and saw something that filled me
with astonishment.

“Why, this is a golf course,” I cried.

Bex nodded.

“The limits are not completed yet,” he explained. “It is hoped to be
able to open them sometime next month. It was some of the men working
on them who discovered the body early this morning.”

I gave a gasp. A little to my left, where for the moment I had
overlooked it, was a long narrow pit, and by it, face downwards, was
the body of a man! For a moment, my heart gave a terrible leap, and I
had a wild fancy that the tragedy had been duplicated. But the
commissary dispelled my illusion by moving forward with a sharp
exclamation of annoyance:

“What have my police been about? They had strict orders to allow no one
near the place without proper credentials!”

The man on the ground turned his head over his shoulder.

“But I have proper credentials,” he remarked, and rose slowly to his
feet.

“My dear M. Giraud,” cried the commissary. “I had no idea that you had
arrived, even. The examining magistrate has been awaiting you with the
utmost impatience.”

As he spoke, I was scanning the new-comer with the keenest curiosity.
The famous detective from the Paris Sûreté was familiar to me by name,
and I was extremely interested to see him in the flesh. He was very
tall, perhaps about thirty years of age, with auburn hair and
moustache, and a military carriage. There was a trace of arrogance in
his manner which showed that he was fully alive to his own importance.
Bex introduced us, presenting Poirot as a colleague. A flicker of
interest came into the detective’s eye.

“I know you by name, M. Poirot,” he said. “You cut quite a figure in
the old days, didn’t you? But methods are very different now.”

“Crimes, though, are very much the same,” remarked Poirot gently.

I saw at once that Giraud was prepared to be hostile. He resented the
other being associated with him, and I felt that if he came across any
clue of importance he would be more than likely to keep it to himself.

“The examining magistrate—” began Bex again. But Giraud interrupted him
rudely:

“A fig for the examining magistrate! The light is the important thing.
For all practical purposes it will be gone in another half-hour or so.
I know all about the case, and the people at the house will do very
well until tomorrow, but, if we’re going to find a clue to the
murderers, here is the spot we shall find it. Is it your police who
have been trampling all over the place? I thought they knew better
nowadays.”

“Assuredly they do. The marks you complain of were made by the workmen
who discovered the body.”

The other grunted disgustedly.

“I can see the tracks where the three of them came through the
hedge—but they were cunning. You can just recognize the centre
footmarks as those of M. Renauld, but those on either side have been
carefully obliterated. Not that there would really be much to see
anyway on this hard ground, but they weren’t taking any chances.”

“The external sign,” said Poirot. “That is what you seek, eh?”

The other detective stared.

“Of course.”

A very faint smile came to Poirot’s lips. He seemed about to speak, but
checked himself. He bent down to where a spade was lying.

“That’s what the grave was dug with, right enough,” said Giraud. “But
you’ll get nothing from it. It was Renauld’s own spade, and the man who
used it wore gloves. Here they are.” He gesticulated with his foot to
where two soiled earth-stained gloves were lying. “And they’re
Renauld’s too—or at least his gardener’s. I tell you, the men who
planned out this crime were taking no chances. The man was stabbed with
his own dagger, and would have been buried with his own spade. They
counted on leaving no traces! But I’ll beat them. There’s always
_something!___ And I mean to find it.”

But Poirot was now apparently interested in something else, a short
discoloured piece of lead-piping which lay beside the spade. He touched
it delicately with his finger.

“And does this, too, belong to the murdered man?” he asked, and I
thought I detected a subtle flavour of irony in the question.

Giraud shrugged his shoulders to indicate that he neither knew nor
cared.

“May have been lying around here for weeks. Anyway, it doesn’t interest
me.”

“I, on the contrary, find it very interesting,” said Poirot sweetly.

I guessed that he was merely bent on annoying the Paris detective and,
if so, he succeeded. The other turned away rudely, remarking that he
had no time to waste, and bending down he resumed his minute search of
the ground.

Meanwhile Poirot, as though struck by a sudden idea, stepped back over
the boundary, and tried the door of the little shed.

“That’s locked,” said Giraud over his shoulder. “But it’s only a place
where the gardener keeps his rubbish. The spade didn’t come from there,
but from the toolshed up by the house.”

“Marvellous,” murmured M. Bex, to me ecstatically. “He has been here
but half an hour, and he already knows everything! What a man!
Undoubtedly Giraud is the greatest detective alive today.”

Although I disliked the detective heartily, I nevertheless was secretly
impressed. Efficiency seemed to radiate from the man. I could not help
feeling that, so far, Poirot had not greatly distinguished himself, and
it vexed me. He seemed to be directing his attention to all sorts of
silly, puerile points that had nothing to do with the case. Indeed, at
this juncture, he suddenly asked:

“M. Bex, tell me, I pray you, the meaning of this whitewashed line that
extends all round the grave. Is it a device of the police?”

“No, M. Poirot, it is an affair of the golf course. It shows that there
is here to be a ‘bunkair,’ as you call it.”

“A bunkair?” Poirot turned to me. “That is the irregular hole filled
with sand and a bank at one side, is it not?”

I concurred.

“You do not play the golf, M. Poirot?” inquired Bex.

“I? Never! What a game!” He became excited. “Figure to yourself, each
hole it is of a different length. The obstacles, they are not arranged
mathematically. Even the greens are frequently up one side! There is
only one pleasing thing—the how do you call them?—tee boxes! They, at
least, are symmetrical.”

I could not refrain from a laugh at the way the game appeared to
Poirot, and my little friend smiled at me affectionately, bearing no
malice. Then he asked:

“But M. Renauld, without doubt he played the golf?”

“Yes, he was a keen golfer. It’s mainly owing to him, and to his large
subscriptions, that this work is being carried forward. He even had a
say in the designing of it.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

Then he remarked:

“It was not a very good choice they made—of a spot to bury the body?
When the men began to dig up the ground, all would have been
discovered.”

“Exactly,” cried Giraud triumphantly. “And that _proves___ that they
were strangers to the place. It’s an excellent piece of indirect
evidence.”

“Yes,” said Poirot doubtfully. “No one who knew would bury a body
there—unless—unless—they _wanted___ it to be discovered. And that is
clearly absurd, is it not?”

Giraud did not even trouble to reply.

“Yes,” said Poirot, in a somewhat dissatisfied voice.
“Yes—undoubtedly—absurd!”




7 The Mysterious Madame Daubreuil

As we retraced our steps to the house, M. Bex excused himself for
leaving us, explaining that he must immediately acquaint the examining
magistrate with the fact of Giraud’s arrival. Giraud himself had been
obviously delighted when Poirot declared that he had seen all he
wanted. The last thing we observed, as we left the spot, was Giraud,
crawling about on all fours, with a thoroughness in his search that I
could not but admire. Poirot guessed my thoughts, for as soon as we
were alone he remarked ironically:

“At last you have seen the detective you admire—the human foxhound! Is
it not so, my friend?”

“At any rate, he’s _doing___ something,” I said, with asperity. “If
there’s anything to find, he’ll find it. Now you—”

“_Eh bien!___ I also have found something! A piece of lead-piping.”

“Nonsense, Poirot. You know very well that’s got nothing to do with it.
I meant _little___ things—traces that may lead us infallibly to the
murderers.”

“_Mon ami___, a clue of two feet long is every bit as valuable as one
measuring two millimetres! But it is the romantic idea that all
important clues must be infinitesimal! As to the piece of lead-piping
having nothing to do with the crime, you say that because Giraud told
you so. No”—as I was about to interpose a question—“we will say no
more. Leave Giraud to his search, and me to my ideas. The case seems
straightforward enough—and yet—and yet, _mon ami___, I am not
satisfied! And do you know why? Because of the wrist watch that is two
hours fast. And then there are several curious little points that do
not seem to fit in. For instance, if the object of the murderers was
revenge, why did they not stab Renauld in his sleep and have done with
it?”

“They wanted the ‘secret,’” I reminded him.

Poirot brushed a speck of dust from his sleeve with a dissatisfied air.

“Well, where is this ‘secret’? Presumably some distance away, since
they wish him to dress himself. Yet he is found murdered close at hand,
almost within ear-shot of the house. Then again, it is pure chance that
a weapon such as the dagger should be lying about casually, ready to
hand.”

He paused frowning, and then went on:

“Why did the servants hear nothing? Were they drugged? Was there an
accomplice and did that accomplice see to it that the front door should
remain open? I wonder if—”

He stopped abruptly. We had reached the drive in front of the house.
Suddenly he turned to me.

“My friend, I am about to surprise you—to please you! I have taken your
reproaches to heart! We will examine some footprints!”

“Where?”

“In that right-hand bed yonder. M. Bex says that they are the footmarks
of the gardener. Let us see if that is so. See, he approaches with his
wheelbarrow.”

Indeed an elderly man was just crossing the drive with a barrowful of
seedlings. Poirot called to him, and he set down the barrow and came
hobbling towards us.

“You are going to ask him for one of his boots to compare with the
footmarks?” I asked breathlessly. My faith in Poirot revived a little.
Since he said the footprints in this right-hand bed were important,
presumably they _were___.

“Exactly,” said Poirot.

“But won’t he think it very odd?”

“He will not think about it at all.”

We could say no more, for the old man had joined us.

“You want me for something, monsieur?”

“Yes. You have been gardener here a long time, haven’t you?”

“Twenty-four years, monsieur.”

“And your name is—?”

“Auguste, monsieur.”

“I was admiring these magnificent geraniums. They are truly superb.
They have been planted long?”

“Some time, monsieur. But of course, to keep the beds looking smart,
one must keep bedding out a few new plants, and remove those that are
over, besides keeping the old blooms well picked off.”

“You put in some new plants yesterday, didn’t you? Those in the middle
there, and in the other bed also?”

“Monsieur has a sharp eye. It takes always a day or so for them to
‘pick up.’ Yes, I put ten new plants in each bed last night. As
Monsieur doubtless knows, one should not put in plants when the sun is
hot.”

Auguste was charmed with Poirot’s interest, and was quite inclined to
be garrulous.

“That is a splendid specimen there,” said Poirot, pointing. “Might I
perhaps have a cutting of it?”

“But certainly, monsieur.” The old fellow stepped into the bed, and
carefully took a slip from the plant Poirot had admired.

Poirot was profuse in his thanks, and Auguste departed to his barrow.

“You see?” said Poirot with a smile, as he bent over the bed to examine
the indentation of the gardener’s hobnailed boot. “It is quite simple.”

“I did not realize—”

“That the foot would be inside the boot? You do not use your excellent
mental capacities sufficiently. Well, what of the footmark?”

I examined the bed carefully.

“All the footmarks in the bed were made by the same boot,” I said at
length after a careful study.

“You think so? _Eh bien___, I agree with you,” said Poirot.

He seemed quite uninterested, and as though he were thinking of
something else.

“At any rate,” I remarked, “you will have one bee less in your bonnet
now.”

“_Mon Dieu!___ But what an idiom! What does it mean?”

“What I meant was that now you will give up your interest in these
footmarks.”

But to my surprise Poirot shook his head.

“No, no, _mon ami___. At last I am on the right track. I am still in
the dark, but, as I hinted just now to M. Bex, these footmarks are the
most important and interesting things in the case! That poor Giraud—I
should not be surprised if he took no notice of them whatever.”

At that moment, the front door opened, and M. Hautet and the commissary
came down the steps.

“Ah, M. Poirot, we were coming to look for you,” said the magistrate.
“It is getting late, but I wish to pay a visit to Madame Daubreuil.
Without doubt she will be very much upset by M. Renauld’s death, and we
may be fortunate enough to get a clue from her. The secret that he did
not confide to his wife, it is possible that he may have told it to the
woman whose love held him enslaved. We know where our Samsons are weak,
don’t we?”

I admired the picturesqueness of M. Hautet’s language. I suspected that
the examining magistrate was by now thoroughly enjoying his part in the
mysterious drama.

“Is M. Giraud not going to accompany us?” asked Poirot.

“M. Giraud has shown clearly that he prefers to conduct the case in his
own way,” said M. Hautet dryly. One could see easily enough that
Giraud’s cavalier treatment of the examining magistrate had not
prejudiced the latter in his favour. We said no more, but fell into
line. Poirot walked with the examining magistrate, and the commissary
and I followed a few paces behind.

“There is no doubt that Françoise’s story is substantially correct,” he
remarked to me in a confidential tone. “I have been telephoning
headquarters. It seems that three times in the last six weeks—that is
to say since the arrival of M. Renauld at Merlinville—Madame Daubreuil
has paid a large sum in notes into her banking account. Altogether the
sum totals two hundred thousand francs!”

“Dear me,” I said, considering, “that must be something like four
thousand pounds!”

“Precisely. Yes, there can be no doubt that he was absolutely
infatuated. But it remains to be seen whether he confided his secret to
her. The examining magistrate is hopeful, but I hardly share his
views.”

During this conversation we were walking down the lane towards the fork
in the road where our car had halted earlier in the afternoon, and in
another moment I realized that the Villa Marguerite, the home of the
mysterious Madame Daubreuil, was the small house from which the
beautiful girl had emerged.

“She has lived here for many years,” said the commissary, nodding his
head towards the house. “Very quietly, very unobtrusively. She seems to
have no friends or relations other than the acquaintances she has made
in Merlinville. She never refers to the past, nor to her husband. One
does not even know if he is alive or dead. There is a mystery about
her, you comprehend.” I nodded, my interest growing.

“And—the daughter?” I ventured.

“A truly beautiful young girl—modest, devout, all that she should be.
One pities her, for, though she may know nothing of the past, a man who
wants to ask her hand in marriage must necessarily inform himself, and
then—” The commissary shrugged his shoulders cynically.

“But it would not be her fault!” I cried, with rising indignation.

“No. But what will you? A man is particular about his wife’s
antecedents.”

I was prevented from further argument by our arrival at the door. M.
Hautet rang the bell. A few minutes elapsed, and then we heard a
footfall within, and the door was opened. On the threshold stood my
young goddess of that afternoon. When she saw us, the colour left her
cheeks, leaving her deathly white, and her eyes widened with
apprehension. There was no doubt about it, she was afraid!

“Mademoiselle Daubreuil,” said M. Hautet, sweeping off his hat, “we
regret infinitely to disturb you, but the exigencies of the Law—you
comprehend? My compliments to Madame your mother, and will she have the
goodness to grant me a few moments’ interview.”

For a moment the girl stood motionless. Her left hand was pressed to
her side, as though to still the sudden unconquerable agitation of her
heart. But she mastered herself, and said in a low voice:

“I will go and see. Please come inside.”

She entered a room on the left of the hall, and we heard the low murmur
of her voice. And then another voice, much the same in timbre, but with
a slightly harder inflection behind its mellow roundness said:

“But certainly. Ask them to enter.”

In another minute we were face to face with the mysterious Madame
Daubreuil.

She was not nearly so tall as her daughter, and the rounded curves of
her figure had all the grace of full maturity. Her hair, again unlike
her daughter’s, was dark, and parted in the middle in the madonna
style. Her eyes, half hidden by the drooping lids, were blue. There was
a dimple in the round chin, and the half parted lips seemed always to
hover on the verge of a mysterious smile. There was something almost
exaggeratedly feminine about her, at once yielding and seductive.
Though very well preserved, she was certainly no longer young, but her
charm was of the quality which is independent of age.

Standing there, in her black dress with the fresh white collar and
cuffs, her hands clasped together, she looked subtly appealing and
helpless.

“You wished to see me, monsieur?” she asked.

“Yes, madame.” M. Hautet cleared his throat. “I am investigating the
death of M. Renauld. You have heard of it, no doubt?”

She bowed her head without speaking. Her expression did not change.

“We came to ask you whether you can—er—throw any light upon the
circumstances surrounding it?”

“I?” The surprise of her tone was excellent.

“Yes, madame. It would, perhaps, be better if we could speak to you
alone.” He looked meaningly in the direction of the girl.

Madame Daubreuil turned to her.

“Marthe, dear—”

But the girl shook her head.

“No, _maman___, I will not go. I am not a child. I am twenty-two. I
shall not go.”

Madame Daubreuil turned back to the examining magistrate.

“You see, monsieur.”

“I should prefer not to speak before Mademoiselle Daubreuil.”

“As my daughter says, she is not a child.”

For a moment the magistrate hesitated, baffled.

“Very well, madame,” he said at last. “Have it your own way. We have
reason to believe that you were in the habit of visiting the dead man
at his Villa in the evenings. Is that so?”

The colour rose in the lady’s pale cheeks, but she replied quietly:

“I deny your right to ask me such a question!”

“Madame, we are investigating a murder.”

“Well, what of it? I had nothing to do with the murder.”

“Madame, we do not say that for a moment. But you knew the dead man
well. Did he ever confide in you as to any danger that threatened him?”

“Never.”

“Did he ever mention his life in Santiago, and any enemies he may have
made there?”

“No.”

“Then you can give us no help at all?”

“I fear not. I really do not see why you should come to me. Cannot his
wife tell you what you want to know?” Her voice held a slender
inflection of irony.

“Madame Renauld has told us all she can.”

“Ah!” said Madame Daubreuil. “I wonder—”

“You wonder what, madame?”

“Nothing.”

The examining magistrate looked at her. He was aware that he was
fighting a duel, and that he had no mean antagonist.

“You persist in your statement that M. Renauld confided nothing in
you?”

“Why should you think it likely that he should confide in me?”

“Because, madame,” said M. Hautet, with calculated brutality. “A man
tells to his mistress what he does not always tell to his wife.”

“Ah!” she sprang forward. Her eyes flashed fire. “Monsieur, you insult
me! And before my daughter! I can tell you nothing. Have the goodness
to leave my house!”

The honours undoubtedly rested with the lady. We left the Villa
Marguerite like a shamefaced pack of schoolboys. The magistrate
muttered angry ejaculations to himself. Poirot seemed lost in thought.
Suddenly he came out of his reverie with a start, and inquired of M.
Hautet if there was a good hotel near at hand.

“There is a small place, the Hotel des Bains, on this side of town. A
few hundred yards down the road. It will be handy for your
investigations. We shall see you in the morning then, I presume?”

“Yes, I thank you, M. Hautet.”

With mutual civilities, we parted company, Poirot and I going towards
Merlinville, and the others returning to the Villa Geneviève.

“The French police system is very marvellous,” said Poirot, looking
after them. “The information they possess about every one’s life, down
to the most commonplace detail, is extraordinary. Though he has only
been here a little over six weeks, they are perfectly well acquainted
with M. Renauld’s tastes and pursuits, and at a moment’s notice they
can produce information as to Madame Daubreuil’s banking account, and
the sums that have lately been paid in! Undoubtedly the _dossier___ is
a great institution. But what is that?” He turned sharply.

A figure was running hatless, down the road after us. It was Marthe
Daubreuil.

“I beg your pardon,” she cried breathlessly, as she reached us. “I—I
should not do this, I know. You must not tell my mother. But is it
true, what the people say, that M. Renauld called in a detective before
he died, and—and that you are he?”

“Yes, mademoiselle,” said Poirot gently. “It is quite true. But how did
you learn it?”

“Françoise told our Amélie,” explained Marthe, with a blush.

Poirot made a grimace.

“The secrecy, it is impossible in an affair of this kind! Not that it
matters. Well, mademoiselle, what is it you want to know?”

The girl hesitated. She seemed longing, yet fearing, to speak. At last,
almost in a whisper, she asked:

“Is—any one suspected?”

Poirot eyed her keenly.

Then he replied evasively:

“Suspicion is in the air at present, mademoiselle.”

“Yes, I know—but—any one in particular?”

“Why do you want to know?”

The girl seemed frightened by the question. All at once Poirot’s words
about her earlier in the day recurred to me. The “girl with the anxious
eyes!”

“M. Renauld was always very kind to me,” she replied at last. “It is
natural that I should be interested.”

“I see,” said Poirot. “Well, mademoiselle, suspicion at present is
hovering round two persons.”

“Two?”

I could have sworn there was a note of surprise and relief in her
voice.

“Their names are unknown, but they are presumed to be Chilians from
Santiago. And now, mademoiselle, you see what comes of being young and
beautiful! I have betrayed professional secrets for you!”

The girl laughed merrily, and then, rather shyly, she thanked him.

“I must run back now. _Maman___ will miss me.”

And she turned and ran back up the road, looking like a modern
Atalanta. I stared after her.

“_Mon ami___,” said Poirot, in his gentle ironical voice, “is it that
we are to remain planted here all night—just because you have seen a
beautiful young woman, and your head is in a whirl?”

I laughed and apologized.

“But she _is___ beautiful, Poirot. Any one might be excused for being
bowled over by her.”

Poirot groaned.

“_Mon Dieu!___ But it is that you have the susceptible heart!”

“Poirot,” I said, “do you remember after the Styles Case when—”

“When you were in love with two charming women at once, and neither of
them were for you? Yes, I remember.”

“You consoled me by saying that perhaps some day we should hunt
together again, and that then—”

“_Eh bien?___”

“Well, we are hunting together again, and—” I paused, and laughed
rather self-consciously.

But to my surprise Poirot shook his head very earnestly.

“Ah, _mon ami___, do not set your heart on Marthe Daubreuil. She is not
for you, that one! Take it from Papa Poirot!”

“Why,” I cried, “the commissary assured me that she was as good as she
is beautiful! A perfect angel!”

“Some of the greatest criminals I have known had the faces of angels,”
remarked Poirot cheerfully. “A malformation of the grey cells may
coincide quite easily with the face of a madonna.”

“Poirot,” I cried, horrified, “you cannot mean that you suspect an
innocent child like this!”

“Ta-ta-ta! Do not excite yourself! I have not said that I suspected
her. But you must admit that her anxiety to know about the case is
somewhat unusual.”

“For once, I see further than you do,” I said. “Her anxiety is not for
herself—but for her mother.”

“My friend,” said Poirot, “as usual, you see nothing at all. Madame
Daubreuil is very well able to look after herself without her daughter
worrying about her. I admit I was teasing you just now, but all the
same I repeat what I said before. Do not set your heart on that girl.
She is not for you! I, Hercule Poirot, know it. _Sacré!___ if only I
could remember where I had seen that face!”

“What face?” I asked, surprised. “The daughter’s?”

“No. The mother’s.”

Noting my surprise, he nodded emphatically.

“But yes—it is as I tell you. It was a long time ago, when I was still
with the Police in Belgium. I have never actually seen the woman
before, but I have seen her picture—and in connection with some case. I
rather fancy—”

“Yes?”

“I may be mistaken, but I rather fancy that it was a murder case!”




8 An Unexpected Meeting

We were up at the Villa betimes next morning. The man on guard at the
gate did not bar our way this time. Instead, he respectfully saluted
us, and we passed on to the house. The maid Léonie was just coming down
the stairs, and seemed not averse to the prospect of a little
conversation.

Poirot inquired after the health of Mrs. Renauld.

Léonie shook her head.

“She is terribly upset, _la pauvre dame!___ She will eat nothing—but
nothing! And she is as pale as a ghost. It is heartrending to see her.
Ah, _par exemple___, it is not I who would grieve like that for a man
who had deceived me with another woman!”

Poirot nodded sympathetically.

“What you say is very just, but what will you? The heart of a woman who
loves will forgive many blows. Still, undoubtedly there must have been
many scenes of recrimination between them in the last few months?”

Again Léonie shook her head.

“Never, monsieur. Never have I heard Madame utter a word of protest—of
reproach, even! She had the temper and disposition of an angel—quite
different to Monsieur.”

“Monsieur Renauld had not the temper of an angel?”

“Far from it. When he enraged himself, the whole house knew of it. The
day that he quarrelled with M. Jack—_ma foi!___ they might have been
heard in the market place, they shouted so loud!”

“Indeed,” said Poirot. “And when did this quarrel take place?”

“Oh! it was just before M. Jack went to Paris. Almost he missed his
train. He came out of the library, and caught up his bag which he had
left in the hall. The automobile, it was being repaired, and he had to
run for the station. I was dusting the salon, and I saw him pass, and
his face was white—white—with two burning spots of red. Ah, but he was
angry!”

Léonie was enjoying her narrative thoroughly.

“And the dispute, what was it about?”

“Ah, that I do not know,” confessed Léonie. “It is true that they
shouted, but their voices were so loud and high, and they spoke so
fast, that only one well acquainted with English could have
comprehended. But Monsieur, he was like a thundercloud all day!
Impossible to please him!”

The sound of a door shutting upstairs cut short Léonie’s loquacity.

“And Françoise who awaits me!” she exclaimed, awakening to a tardy
remembrance of her duties. “That old one, she always scolds.”

“One moment, mademoiselle. The examining magistrate, where is he?”

“They have gone out to look at the automobile in the garage. Monsieur
the commissary had some idea that it might have been used on the night
of the murder.”

“_Quelle idée___,” murmured Poirot, as the girl disappeared.

“You will go out and join them?”

“No, I shall await their return in the _salon___. It is cool there on
this hot morning.”

This placid way of taking things did not quite commend itself to me.

“If you don’t mind—” I said, and hesitated.

“Not in the least. You wish to investigate on your own account, eh?”

“Well, I’d rather like to have a look at Giraud, if he’s anywhere
about, and see what he’s up to.”

“The human foxhound,” murmured Poirot, as he leaned back in a
comfortable chair, and closed his eyes. “By all means, my friend. Au
revoir.”

I strolled out of the front door. It was certainly hot. I turned up the
path we had taken the day before. I had a mind to study the scene of
the crime myself. I did not go directly to the spot, however, but
turned aside into the bushes, so as to come out on the links some
hundred yards or so further to the right. If Giraud were still on the
spot, I wanted to observe his methods before he knew of my presence.
But the shrubbery here was much denser, and I had quite a struggle to
force my way through. When I emerged at last on the course, it was
quite unexpectedly and with such vigour that I cannoned heavily into a
young lady who had been standing with her back to the plantation.

She not unnaturally gave a suppressed shriek, but I, too, uttered an
exclamation of surprise. For it was my friend of the train, Cinderella!

The surprise was mutual.

“You,” we both exclaimed simultaneously.

The young lady recovered herself first.

“My only Aunt!” she exclaimed. “What are you doing here?”

“For the matter of that, what are you?” I retorted.

“When last I saw you, the day before yesterday, you were trotting home
to England like a good little boy. Have they given you a season ticket
to and fro, on the strength of your M.P.?”

I ignored the end of the speech.

“When last I saw you,” I said, “you were trotting home with your
sister, like a good little girl. By the way, how is your sister?”

A flash of white teeth rewarded me.

“How kind of you to ask! My sister is well, I thank you.”

“She is here with you?”

“She remained in town,” said the minx with dignity.

“I don’t believe you’ve got a sister,” I laughed. “If you have, her
name is Harris!”

“Do you remember mine?” she asked, with a smile.

“Cinderella. But you’re going to tell me the real one now, aren’t you?”

She shook her head with a wicked look.

“Not even why you’re here?”

“Oh, that! I suppose you’ve heard of members of my profession
‘resting.’”

“At expensive French watering-places?”

“Dirt cheap if you know where to go.”

I eyed her keenly.

“Still, you’d no intention of coming here when I met you two days ago?”

“We all have our disappointments,” said Miss Cinderella sententiously.
“There now, I’ve told you quite as much as is good for you. Little boys
should not be inquisitive. You’ve not yet told me what you’re doing
here? Got the M.P. in tow, I suppose, doing the gay boy on the beach.”

I shook my head. “Guess again. You remember my telling you that my
great friend was a detective?”

“Yes?”

“And perhaps you’ve heard about this crime—at the Villa Geneviève—?”

She stared at me. Her breast heaved, and her eyes grew wide and round.

“You don’t mean—that you’re in on _that?___”

I nodded. There was no doubt that I had scored heavily. Her emotion, as
she regarded me, was only too evident. For some few seconds, she
remained silent, staring at me. Then she nodded her head emphatically.

“Well, if that doesn’t beat the band! Tote me round. I want to see all
the horrors.”

“What do you mean?”

“What I say. Bless the boy, didn’t I tell you I doted on crimes? What
do you think I’m imperilling my ankles for in high-heeled shoes over
this stubble? I’ve been nosing round for hours. Tried the front way in,
but that old stick-in-the-mud of a French gendarme wasn’t taking any. I
guess Helen of Troy, and Cleopatra, and Mary, Queen of Scots, rolled in
one wouldn’t cut ice with him! It’s a real piece of luck happening on
you this way. Come on, show me all the sights.”

“But look here—wait a minute—I can’t. Nobody’s allowed in. They’re
awfully strict.”

“Aren’t you and your friend the big bugs?”

I was loath to relinquish my position of importance.

“Why are you so keen?” I asked weakly. “And what is it you want to
see.”

“Oh, everything! The place where it happened, and the weapon, and the
body, and any finger-prints or interesting things like that. I’ve never
had a chance of being right in on a murder like this before. It’ll last
me all my life?”

I turned away, sickened. What were women coming to nowadays? The girl’s
ghoulish excitement nauseated me. I had read of the mobs of women who
besieged the law courts when some wretched man was being tried for his
life on the capital charge. I had sometimes wondered who these women
were. Now I knew. They were of the likeness of Cinderella, young, yet
obsessed with a yearning for morbid excitement, for sensation at any
price, without regard to any decency or good feeling. The vividness of
the girl’s beauty had attracted me in spite of myself, yet at heart I
retained my first impression of disapproval and dislike. I thought of
my mother, long since dead. What would she have said of this strange
modern product of girlhood? The pretty face with the paint and powder,
and the ghoulish mind behind!

“Come off your high horse,” said the lady suddenly. “And don’t give
yourself airs. When you got called to this job, did you put your nose
in the air and say it was a nasty business, and you wouldn’t be mixed
up in it?”

“No, but—”

“If you’d been here on a holiday, wouldn’t you be nosing round just the
same as I am? Of course you would.”

“I’m a man. You’re a woman.”

“Your idea of a woman is some one who gets on a chair and shrieks if
she sees a mouse. That’s all prehistoric. But you _will___ show me
round, won’t you? You see, it might make a big difference to me.”

“In what way?”

“They’re keeping all the reporters out. I might make a big scoop with
one of the papers. You don’t know how much they pay for a bit of inside
stuff.”

I hesitated. She slipped a small soft hand into mine.

“_Please___—there’s a dear.”

I capitulated. Secretly, I knew that I should rather enjoy the part of
showman. After all, the moral attitude displayed by the girl was none
of my business. I was a little nervous as to what the examining
magistrate might say, but I reassured myself by the reflection that no
harm could possibly be done.

We repaired first to the spot where the body had been discovered. A man
was on guard there, who saluted respectfully, knowing me by sight, and
raised no question as to my companion. Presumably he regarded her as
vouched for by me. I explained to Cinderella just how the discovery had
been made, and she listened attentively, sometimes putting an
intelligent question. Then we turned our steps in the direction of the
Villa. I proceeded rather cautiously, for, truth to tell, I was not at
all anxious to meet any one. I took the girl through the shrubbery
round to the back of the house where the small shed was. I recollected
that yesterday evening, after relocking the door, M. Bex had left the
key with the _sergent de ville___ Marchaud, “in case M. Giraud should
require it while we are upstairs.” I thought it quite likely that the
Sûreté detective, after using it, had returned it to Marchaud again.
Leaving the girl out of sight in the shrubbery, I entered the house.
Marchaud was on duty outside the door of the _salon___. From within
came the murmur of voices.

“Monsieur desires Hautet? He is within. He is again interrogating
Françoise.”

“No,” I said hastily, “I don’t want him. But I should very much like
the key of the shed outside if it is not against regulations.”

“But certainly, monsieur.” He produced it. “Here it is. M. le juge gave
orders that all facilities were to be placed at your disposal. You will
return it to me when you have finished out there, that is all.”

“Of course.”

I felt a thrill of satisfaction as I realized that in Marchaud’s eyes,
at least, I ranked equally in importance with Poirot. The girl was
waiting for me. She gave an exclamation of delight as she saw the key
in my hand.

“You’ve got it then?”

“Of course,” I said coolly. “All the same, you know, what I’m doing is
highly irregular.”

“You’ve been a perfect duck, and I shan’t forget it. Come along. They
can’t see us from the house, can they?”

“Wait a minute.” I arrested her eager advance. “I won’t stop you if you
really wish to go in. But do you? You’ve seen the grave, and the
grounds, and you’ve heard all the details of the affair. Isn’t that
enough for you? This is going to be gruesome, you know,
and—unpleasant.”

She looked at me for a moment with an expression that I could not quite
fathom. Then she laughed.

“Me for the horrors,” she said. “Come along.”

In silence we arrived at the door of the shed. I opened it and we
passed in. I walked over to the body, and gently pulled down the sheet
as M. Bex had done the preceding afternoon. A little gasping sound
escaped from the girl’s lips, and I turned and looked at her. There was
horror on her face now, and those debonair high spirits of hers were
quenched utterly. She had not chosen to listen to my advice, and she
was punished now for her disregard of it. I felt singularly merciless
towards her. She should go through with it now. I turned the corpse
gently over.

“You see,” I said, “he was stabbed in the back.”

Her voice was almost soundless.

“With what?”

I nodded towards the glass jar.

“That dagger.”

Suddenly the girl reeled, and then sank down in a heap. I sprang to her
assistance.

“You are faint. Come out of here. It has been too much for you.”

“Water,” she murmured. “Quick. Water.…”

I left her, and rushed into the house. Fortunately none of the servants
were about, and I was able to secure a glass of water unobserved and
add a few drops of brandy from a pocket flask. In a few minutes I was
back again. The girl was lying as I had left her, but a few sips of the
brandy and water revived her in a marvellous manner.

“Take me out of here—oh, quickly, quickly!” she cried, shuddering.

Supporting her with my arm I led her out into the air, and she pulled
the door to behind her. Then she drew a deep breath.

“That’s better. Oh, it was horrible! Why did you ever let me go in?”

I felt this to be so feminine that I could not forbear a smile.
Secretly, I was not dissatisfied with her collapse. It proved that she
was not quite so callous as I had thought her. After all she was little
more than a child, and her curiosity had probably been of the
unthinking order.

“I did my best to stop you, you know,” I said gently.

“I suppose you did. Well, good-bye.”

“Look here, you can’t start off like that—all alone. You’re not fit for
it. I insist on accompanying you back to Merlinville.”

“Nonsense. I’m quite all right now.”

“Supposing you felt faint again? No, I shall come with you.”

But this she combated with a good deal of energy. In the end, however,
I prevailed so far as to be allowed to accompany her to the outskirts
of the town. We retraced our steps over our former route, passing the
grave again, and making a detour on to the road. Where the first
straggling line of shops began, she stopped and held out her hand.

“Good-bye, and thank you ever so much for coming with me.”

“Are you sure you’re all right now?”

“Quite, thanks. I hope you won’t get into any trouble over showing me
things?”

I disclaimed the idea lightly.

“Well, good-bye.”

“Au revoir,” I corrected. “If you’re staying here, we shall meet
again.”

She flashed a smile at me.

“That’s so. Au revoir, then.”

“Wait a second, you haven’t told me your address?”

“Oh, I’m staying at the Hôtel du Phare. It’s a little place, but quite
good. Come and look me up tomorrow.”

“I will,” I said, with perhaps rather unnecessary _empressement___.

I watched her out of sight, then turned and retraced my steps to the
Villa. I remembered that I had not relocked the door of the shed.
Fortunately no one had noticed the oversight, and turning the key I
removed it and returned it to the _sergent de ville___. And, as I did
so, it came upon me suddenly that though Cinderella had given me her
address I still did not know her name.




9 M. Giraud Finds Some Clues

In the _Salon___ I found the examining magistrate busily interrogating
the old gardener Auguste. Poirot and the commissary, who were both
present, greeted me respectively with a smile and a polite bow. I
slipped quietly into a seat. M. Hautet was painstaking and meticulous
in the extreme, but did not succeed in eliciting anything of
importance.

The gardening gloves Auguste admitted to be his. He wore them when
handling a certain species of primula plant which was poisonous to some
people. He could not say when he had worn them last. Certainly he had
not missed them. Where were they kept? Sometimes in one place,
sometimes in another. The spade was usually to be found in the small
tool shed. Was it locked? Of course it was locked. Where was the key
kept? _Parbleu___, it was in the door of course! There was nothing of
value to steal. Who would have expected a party of bandits, of
assassins? Such things did not happen in Madame la Vicomtesse’s time.
M. Hautet signifying that he had finished with him, the old man
withdrew, grumbling to the last. Remembering Poirot’s unaccountable
insistence on the footprints in the flower beds, I scrutinized him
narrowly as he gave his evidence. Either he had nothing to do with the
crime or he was a consummate actor. Suddenly, just as he was going out
of the door, an idea struck me. “_Pardon___ M. Hautet,” I cried, “but
will you permit me to ask him one question?”

“But certainly, monsieur.”

Thus encouraged, I turned to Auguste.

“Where do you keep your boots?”

“_Sac à papier!___” growled the old man. “On my feet. Where else?”

“But when you go to bed at night?”

“Under my bed.”

“But who cleans them?”

“Nobody. Why should they be cleaned? Is it that I promenade myself on
the front like a young man? On Sunday I wear the Sunday boots, _bien
entendu___, but otherwise—!” he shrugged his shoulders.

I shook my head, discouraged.

“Well, well,” said the magistrate. “We do not advance very much.
Undoubtedly we are held up until we get the return cable from Santiago.
Has any one seen Giraud? In verity that one lacks politeness! I have a
very good mind to send for him and—”

“You will not have to send far, M. le juge.”

The quiet voice startled us. Giraud was standing outside looking in
through the open window.

He leaped lightly into the room, and advanced to the table.

“Here I am, M. le juge, at your service. Accept my excuses for not
presenting myself sooner.”

“Not at all. Not at all,” said the magistrate, rather confused.

“Of course I am only a detective,” continued the other. “I know nothing
of interrogatories. Were I conducting one, I should be inclined to do
so without an open window. Any one standing outside can so easily hear
all that passes.… But no matter.”

M. Hautet flushed angrily. There was evidently going to be no love lost
between the examining magistrate and the detective in charge of the
case. They had fallen foul of each other at the start. Perhaps in any
event it would have been much the same. To Giraud, all examining
magistrates were fools, and to M. Hautet who took himself seriously,
the casual manner of the Paris detective could not fail to give
offence.

“_Eh bien___, M. Giraud,” said the magistrate rather sharply. “Without
doubt you have been employing your time to a marvel? You have the names
of the assassins for us, have you not? And also the precise spot where
they find themselves now?”

Unmoved by this irony, Giraud replied:

“I know at least where they have come from.”

“_Comment?___”

Giraud took two small objects from his pocket and laid them down on the
table. We crowded round. The objects were very simple ones: the stub of
a cigarette, and an unlighted match. The detective wheeled round on
Poirot.

“What do you see there?” he asked.

There was something almost brutal in his tone. It made my cheeks flush.
But Poirot remained unmoved. He shrugged his shoulders.

“A cigarette end, and a match.”

“And what does that tell you?”

Poirot spread out his hands.

“It tells me—nothing.”

“Ah!” said Giraud, in a satisfied voice. “You haven’t made a study of
these things. That’s not an ordinary match—not in this country at
least. It’s common enough in South America. Luckily it’s unlighted. I
mightn’t have recognized it otherwise. Evidently one of the men threw
away his cigarette end, and lit another, spilling one match out of the
box as he did so.”

“And the other match?” asked Poirot.

“Which match?”

“The one he _did___ light his cigarette with. You have found that
also?”

“No.”

“Perhaps you didn’t search very thoroughly.”

“Not search thoroughly—” For a moment it seemed as though the detective
were going to break out angrily, but with an effort he controlled
himself. “I see you love a joke, M. Poirot. But in any case, match or
no match, the cigarette end would be sufficient. It is a South American
cigarette with liquorice pectoral paper.”

Poirot bowed. The commissary spoke:

“The cigarette end and match might have belonged to M. Renauld.
Remember, it is only two years since he returned from South America.”

“No,” replied the other confidently. “I have already searched among the
effects of M. Renauld. The cigarettes he smoked and the matches he used
are quite different.”

“You do not think it odd,” asked Poirot, “that these strangers should
come unprovided with a weapon, with gloves, with a spade, and that they
should so conveniently find all these things?”

Giraud smiled in a rather superior manner.

“Undoubtedly it is strange. Indeed, without the theory that I hold, it
would be inexplicable.”

“Aha!” said M. Hautet. “An accomplice. An accomplice within the house!”

“Or outside it,” said Giraud with a peculiar smile.

“But some one must have admitted them? We cannot allow that, by an
unparalleled piece of good fortune, they found the door ajar for them
to walk in?”

“_D’accord___, M. le juge. The door was opened for them, but it could
just as easily be opened from outside—by some one who possessed a key.”

“But who did possess a key?”

Giraud shrugged his shoulders.

“As for that, no one who possesses one is going to admit the fact if
they can help it. But several people _might___ have had one. M. Jack
Renauld, the son, for instance. It is true that he is on his way to
South America, but he might have lost the key or had it stolen from
him. Then there is the gardener—he has been here many years. One of the
younger servants may have a lover. It is easy to take an impression of
a key and have one cut. There are many possibilities. Then there is
another person who, I should judge, is exceedingly likely to have such
a thing in her keeping.”

“Who is that?”

“Madame Daubreuil,” said the detective dryly.

“Eh, eh!” said the magistrate, his face falling a little, “so you have
heard about that, have you?”

“I hear everything,” said Giraud imperturbably.

“There is one thing I could swear you have not heard,” said M. Hautet,
delighted to be able to show superior knowledge, and without more ado,
he retailed the story of the mysterious visitor the night before. He
also touched on the cheque made out to “Duveen,” and finally handed
Giraud the letter signed “Bella.”

Giraud listened in silence, studied the letter attentively, and then
handed it back.

“All very interesting, M. le juge. But my theory remains unaffected.”

“And your theory is?”

“For the moment I prefer not to say. Remember, I am only just beginning
my investigations.”

“Tell me one thing, M. Giraud,” said Poirot suddenly. “Your theory
allows for the door being opened. It does not explain why it was
_left___ open. When they departed, would it not have been natural for
them to close it behind them. If a _sergent de ville___ had chanced to
come up to the house, as is sometimes done to see that all is well,
they might have been discovered and overtaken almost at once.”

“Bah! They forgot it. A mistake, I grant you.”

Then, to my surprise, Poirot uttered almost the same words as he had
uttered to Bex the previous evening:

“_I do not agree with you.___ The door being left open was the result
of either design or necessity, and any theory that does not admit that
fact is bound to prove vain.”

We all regarded the little man with a good deal of astonishment. The
confession of ignorance drawn from him over the match end had, I
thought, been bound to humiliate him, but here he was self satisfied as
ever, laying down the law to the great Giraud without a tremor.

The detective twisted his moustache, eyeing my friend in a somewhat
bantering fashion.

“You don’t agree with me, eh? Well, what strikes you particularly about
the case. Let’s hear your views.”

“One thing presents itself to me as being significant. Tell me, M.
Giraud, does nothing strike you as familiar about this case? Is there
nothing it reminds you of?”

“Familiar? Reminds me of? I can’t say off-hand. I don’t think so,
though.”

“You are wrong,” said Poirot quietly. “A crime almost precisely similar
has been committed before.”

“When? And where?”

“Ah, that, unfortunately, I cannot for the moment remember—but I shall
do so. I had hoped you might be able to assist me.”

Giraud snorted incredulously.

“There have been many affairs of masked men! I cannot remember the
details of them all. These crimes all resemble each other more or
less.”

“There is such a thing as the individual touch.” Poirot suddenly
assumed his lecturing manner, and addressed us collectively. “I am
speaking to you now of the psychology of crime. M. Giraud knows quite
well that each criminal has his particular method, and that the police,
when called in to investigate—say a case of burglary—can often make a
shrewd guess at the offender, simply by the peculiar method he has
employed. (Japp would tell you the same, Hastings.) Man is an
unoriginal animal. Unoriginal within the law in his daily respectable
life, equally unoriginal outside the law. If a man commits a crime, any
other crime he commits will resemble it closely. The English murderer
who disposed of his wives in succession by drowning them in their baths
was a case in point. Had he varied his methods, he might have escaped
detection to this day. But he obeyed the common dictates of human
nature, arguing that what had once succeeded would succeed again, and
he paid the penalty of his lack of originality.”

“And the point of all this?” sneered Giraud.

“That when you have two crimes precisely similar in design and
execution, you find the same brain behind them both. I am looking for
that brain, M. Giraud—and I shall find it. Here we have a true clue—a
psychological clue. You may know all about cigarettes and match ends,
M. Giraud, but I, Hercule Poirot, know the mind of man!” And the
ridiculous little fellow tapped his forehead with emphasis.

Giraud remained singularly unimpressed.

“For your guidance,” continued Poirot, “I will also advise you of one
fact which might fail to be brought to your notice. The wrist watch of
Madame Renauld, on the day following the tragedy, had gained two hours.
It might interest you to examine it.”

Giraud stared.

“Perhaps it was in the habit of gaining?”

“As a matter of fact, I am told it did.”

“_Eh bien___, then!”

“All the same, two hours is a good deal,” said Poirot softly. “Then
there is the matter of the footprints in the flower-bed.”

He nodded his head towards the open window. Giraud took two eager
strides, and looked out.

“This bed here?”

“Yes.”

“But I see no footprints?”

“No,” said Poirot, straightening a little pile of books on a table.
“There are none.”

For a moment an almost murderous rage obscured Giraud’s face. He took
two strides towards his tormentor, but at that moment the _salon___
door was opened, and Marchaud announced.

“M. Stonor, the secretary, has just arrived from England. May he
enter?”




10 Gabriel Stonor

The man who entered the room was a striking figure. Very tall, with a
well knit athletic frame, and a deeply bronzed face and neck, he
dominated the assembly. Even Giraud seemed anaemic beside him. When I
knew him better I realized that Gabriel Stonor was quite an unusual
personality. English by birth, he had knocked about all over the world.
He had shot big game in Africa, travelled in Korea, ranched in
California, and traded in the South Sea Islands. He had been secretary
to a New York railway magnate, and had spent a year encamped in the
desert with a friendly tribe of Arabs.

His unerring eye picked out M. Hautet.

“The examining magistrate in charge of the case? Pleased to meet you,
M. le juge. This is a terrible business. How’s Mrs. Renauld? Is she
bearing up fairly well? It must have been an awful shock to her.”

“Terrible, terrible,” said M. Hautet. “Permit me to introduce M.
Bex—our commissary of police, M. Giraud of the Sûreté. This gentleman
is M. Hercule Poirot. M. Renauld sent for him, but he arrived too late
to do anything to avert the tragedy. A friend of M. Poirot’s, Captain
Hastings.”

Stonor looked at Poirot with some interest.

“Sent for you, did he?”

“You did not know, then, that M. Renauld contemplated calling in a
detective?” interposed M. Bex.

“No, I didn’t. But it doesn’t surprise me a bit.”

“Why?”

“Because the old man was rattled! I don’t know what it was all about.
He didn’t confide in me. We weren’t on those terms. But rattled he
was—and badly!”

“H’m!” said M. Hautet. “But you have no notion of the cause?”

“That’s what I said, sir.”

“You will pardon me, M. Stonor, but we must begin with a few
formalities. Your name?”

“Gabriel Stonor.”

“How long ago was it that you became secretary to M. Renauld?”

“About two years ago, when he first arrived from South America. I met
him through a mutual friend, and he offered me the post. A thundering
good boss he was too.”

“Did he talk to you much about his life in South America?”

“Yes, a good bit.”

“Do you know if he was ever in Santiago?”

“Several times, I believe.”

“He never mentioned any special incident that occurred there—anything
that might have provoked some vendetta against him?”

“Never.”

“Did he speak of any secret that he had acquired whilst sojourning
there?”

“No.”

“Did he ever say anything at all about a secret?”

“Not that I can remember. But, for all that, there _was___ a mystery
about him. I’ve never heard him speak of his boyhood for instance, or
of any incident prior to his arrival in South America. He was a French
Canadian by birth, I believe, but I’ve never heard him speak of his
life in Canada. He could shut up like a clam if he liked.”

“So, as far as you know, he had no enemies, and you can give us no clue
as to any secret to obtain possession of which he might have been
murdered?”

“That’s so.”

“M. Stonor, have you ever heard the name of Duveen in connection with
M. Renauld?”

“Duveen. Duveen.” He tried the name over thoughtfully. “I don’t think I
have. And yet it seems familiar.”

“Do you know a lady, a friend of M. Renauld’s whose Christian name is
Bella?”

Again Mr. Stonor shook his head.

“Bella Duveen? Is that the full name? It’s curious! I’m sure I know it.
But for the moment I can’t remember in what connection.”

The magistrate coughed.

“You understand, M. Stonor—the case is like this. _There must be no
reservations.___ You might, perhaps, through a feeling of consideration
for Madame Renauld—for whom, I gather, you have a great esteem and
affection, you might—_enfin!___” said M. Hautet getting rather tied up
in his sentence, “there must absolutely be no reservations.”

Stonor stared at him, a dawning light of comprehension in his eyes.

“I don’t quite get you,” he said gently. “Where does Mrs. Renauld come
in? I’ve an immense respect and affection for that lady; she’s a very
wonderful and unusual type, but I don’t quite see how my reservations,
or otherwise, could affect her?”

“Not if this Bella Duveen should prove to have been something more than
a friend to her husband?”

“Ah!” said Stonor. “I get you now. But I’ll bet my bottom dollar that
you’re wrong. The old man never so much as looked at a petticoat. He
just adored his own wife. They were the most devoted couple I know.”

M. Hautet shook his head gently.

“M. Stonor, we hold absolute proof—a love letter written by this Bella
to M. Renauld, accusing him of having tired of her. Moreover, we have
further proof that, at the time of his death, he was carrying on an
intrigue with a Frenchwoman, a Madame Daubreuil, who rents the
adjoining Villa. And this is the man who, according to you, never
looked at a petticoat!”

The secretary’s eyes narrowed.

“Hold on, M. le juge. You’re barking up the wrong tree. I knew Paul
Renauld. What you’ve just been saying is utterly impossible. There’s
some other explanation.”

The magistrate shrugged his shoulders.

“What other explanation could there be?”

“What leads you to think it was a love affair?”

“Madame Daubreuil was in the habit of visiting him here in the
evenings. Also, since M. Renauld came to the Villa Geneviève, Madame
Daubreuil has paid large sums of money into the bank in notes. In all,
the amount totals four thousand pounds of your English money.”

“I guess that’s right,” said Stonor quietly. “I transmitted him those
sums at his request. But it wasn’t an intrigue.”

“Eh! _mon Dieu!___ What else could it be?”

“_Blackmail___,” said Stonor sharply, bringing down his hand with a
slam on the table. “That’s what it was.”

“Ah! Voilà une idée!” cried the magistrate, shaken in spite of himself.

“Blackmail,” repeated Stonor. “The old man was being bled—and at a good
rate too. Four thousand in a couple of months. Whew! I told you just
now there was a mystery about Renauld. Evidently this Madame Daubreuil
knew enough of it to put the screws on.”

“It is possible,” the commissary cried excitedly. “Decidedly, it is
possible.”

“Possible?” roared Stonor. “It’s certain! Tell me, have you asked Mrs.
Renauld about this love affair stunt of yours?”

“No, monsieur. We did not wish to occasion her any distress if it could
reasonably be avoided.”

“Distress? Why, she’d laugh in your face. I tell you, she and Renauld
were a couple in a hundred.”

“Ah, that reminds me of another point,” said M. Hautet. “Did M. Renauld
take you into his confidence at all as to the dispositions of his
will?”

“I know all about it—took it to the lawyer for him after he’d drawn it
out. I can give you the name of his solicitors if you want to see it.
They’ve got it there. Quite simple. Half in trust to his wife for her
lifetime, the other half to his son. A few legacies. I rather think he
left me a thousand.”

“When was this will drawn up?”

“Oh, about a year and a half ago.”

“Would it surprise you very much, M. Stonor, to hear that M. Renauld
had made another will, less than a fortnight ago?”

Stonor was obviously very much surprised.

“I’d no idea of it. What’s it like?”

“The whole of his vast fortune is left unreservedly to his wife. There
is no mention of his son.”

Mr. Stonor gave vent to a prolonged whistle.

“I call that rather rough on the lad. His mother adores him, of course,
but to the world at large it looks rather like a want of confidence on
his father’s part. It will be rather galling to his pride. Still, it
all goes to prove what I told you, that Renauld and his wife were on
first rate terms.”

“Quite so, quite so,” said M. Hautet. “It is possible we shall have to
revise our ideas on several points. We have, of course, cabled to
Santiago, and are expecting a reply from there any minute. In all
possibility, everything will then be perfectly clear and
straightforward. On the other hand, if your suggestion of blackmail is
true, Madame Daubreuil ought to be able to give us valuable
information.”

Poirot interjected a remark:

“M. Stonor, the English chauffeur, Masters, had he been long with M.
Renauld?”

“Over a year?”

“Have you any idea whether he has ever been in South America?”

“I’m quite sure he hasn’t. Before coming to Mr. Renauld, he had been
for many years with some people in Gloucestershire whom I know well.”

“In fact, you can answer for him as being above suspicion?”

“Absolutely.”

Poirot seemed somewhat crest-fallen.

Meanwhile the magistrate had summoned Marchaud.

“My compliments to Madame Renauld, and I should be glad to speak to her
for a few minutes. Beg her not to disturb herself. I will wait upon her
upstairs.”

Marchaud saluted and disappeared.

We waited some minutes, and then, to our surprise, the door opened, and
Mrs. Renauld, deathly pale in her heavy mourning, entered the room.

M. Hautet brought forward a chair, uttering vigorous protestations, and
she thanked him with a smile. Stonor was holding one hand of hers in
his with an eloquent sympathy. Words evidently failed him. Mrs. Renauld
turned to M. Hautet.

“You wished to ask me something, M. le juge.”

“With your permission, madame. I understand your husband was a French
Canadian by birth. Can you tell me anything of his youth, or
upbringing?”

She shook her head.

“My husband was always very reticent about himself, monsieur. He came
from the North West, I know, but I fancy that he had an unhappy
childhood, for he never cared to speak of that time. Our life was lived
entirely in the present and the future.”

“Was there any mystery in his past life?”

Mrs. Renauld smiled a little, and shook her head.

“Nothing so romantic, I am sure, M. le juge.”

M. Hautet also smiled.

“True, we must not permit ourselves to get melodramatic. There is one
thing more—” he hesitated.

Stonor broke in impetuously:

“They’ve got an extraordinary idea into their heads Mrs. Renauld. They
actually fancy that Mr. Renauld was carrying on an intrigue with a
Madame Daubreuil who, it seems, lives next door.”

The scarlet colour flamed into Mrs. Renauld’s cheeks. She flung her
head up, then bit her lip, her face quivering. Stonor stood looking at
her in astonishment, but M. Bex leaned forward and said gently: “We
regret to cause you pain, madame, but have you any reason to believe
that Madame Daubreuil was your husband’s mistress?”

With a sob of anguish, Mrs. Renauld buried her face in her hands. Her
shoulders heaved convulsively. At last she lifted her head, and said
brokenly:

“She may have been.”

Never, in all my life, have I seen anything to equal the blank
amazement on Stonor’s face. He was thoroughly taken aback.




11 Jack Renauld

What the next development of the conversation would have been, I cannot
say, for at that moment the door was thrown violently open, and a tall
young man strode into the room.

Just for a moment I had the uncanny sensation that the dead man had
come to life again. Then I realized that this dark head was untouched
with grey, and that, in point of fact, it was a mere boy who now burst
in among us with so little ceremony. He went straight to Mrs. Renauld
with an impetuosity that took no heed of the presence of others.

“Mother!”

“Jack!” With a cry she folded him in her arms. “My dearest! But what
brings you here? You were to sail on the _Anzora___ from Cherbourg two
days ago?” Then, suddenly recalling to herself the presence of others,
she turned with a certain dignity, “My son, messieurs.”

“Aha!” said M. Hautet, acknowledging the young man’s bow. “So you did
not sail on the _Anzora?___”

“No, monsieur. As I was about to explain, the _Anzora___ was detained
twenty-four hours through engine trouble. I should have sailed last
night instead of the night before, but, happening to buy an evening
paper, I saw in it an account of the—the awful tragedy that had
befallen us—” His voice broke and the tears came into his eyes. “My
poor father—my poor, poor, father.”

Staring at him like one in a dream, Mrs. Renauld repeated: “So you did
not sail?” And then, with a gesture of infinite weariness, she murmured
as though to herself, “After all, it does not matter—now.”

“Sit down, M. Renauld, I beg of you,” said M. Hautet, indicating a
chair. “My sympathy for you is profound. It must have been a terrible
shock to you to learn the news as you did. However, it is most
fortunate that you were prevented from sailing. I am in hopes that you
may be able to give us just the information we need to clear up this
mystery.”

“I am at your disposal, M. le juge. Ask me any questions you please.”

“To begin with, I understand that this journey was being undertaken at
your father’s request?”

“Quite so, M. le juge. I received a telegram bidding me to proceed
without delay to Buenos Ayres, and from thence via the Andes to
Valparaiso and on to Santiago.”

“Ah. And the object of this journey?”

“I have no idea, M. le juge.”

“What?”

“No. See, here is the telegram.”

The magistrate took it and read it aloud.

“‘Proceed immediately Cherbourg embark _Anzora___ sailing tonight
Buenos Ayres. Ultimate destination Santiago. Further instructions will
await you Buenos Ayres. Do not fail. Matter is of utmost importance.
Renauld.’ And there had been no previous correspondence on the matter?”

Jack Renauld shook his head.

“That is the only intimation of any kind. I knew, of course, that my
father, having lived so long out there, had necessarily many interests
in South America. But he had never mooted any suggestion of sending me
out.”

“You have, of course, been a good deal in South America, M. Renauld?”

“I was there as a child. But I was educated in England, and spent most
of my holidays in that country, so I really know far less of South
America than might be supposed. You see, the war broke out when I was
seventeen.”

“You served in the English Flying Corps, did you not?”

“Yes, M. le juge.”

M. Hautet nodded his head, and proceeded with his inquiries along the,
by now, well-known lines. In response, Jack Renauld declared definitely
that he knew nothing of any enmity his father might have incurred in
the city of Santiago, or elsewhere in the South American continent,
that he had noticed no change in his father’s manner of late, and that
he had never heard him refer to a secret. He had regarded the mission
to South America as connected with business interests.

As M. Hautet paused for a minute, the quiet voice of Giraud broke in.

“I should like to put a few questions on my own account, M. le juge.”

“By all means, M. Giraud, if you wish,” said the magistrate coldly.

Giraud edged his chair a little nearer to the table.

“Were you on good terms with your father, M. Renauld?”

“Certainly I was,” returned the lad haughtily.

“You assert that positively?”

“Yes.”

“No little disputes, eh?”

Jack shrugged his shoulders. “Every one may have a difference of
opinion now and then.”

“Quite so, quite so. But if any one were to assert that you had a
violent quarrel with your father on the eve of your departure for
Paris, that person, without doubt, would be lying?”

I could not but admire the ingenuity of Giraud. His boast “I know
everything” had been no idle one. Jack Renauld was clearly disconcerted
by the question.

“We—we did have an argument,” he admitted.

“Ah, an argument! In the course of that argument did you use this
phrase: ‘When you are dead, I can do as I please?’”

“I may have done,” muttered the other. “I don’t know.”

“In response to that, did your father say: ‘But I am not dead yet!’ To
which you responded: ‘I wish you were!’”

The boy made no answer. His hands fiddled nervously with the things on
the table in front of him.

“I must request an answer, please, M. Renauld,” said Giraud sharply.

With an angry exclamation, the boy swept a heavy paper-knife on to the
floor.

“What does it matter? You might as well know. Yes, I did quarrel with
my father. I dare say I said all those things—I was so angry I cannot
even remember what I said! I was furious—I could almost have killed him
at that moment—there, make the most of that!” He leant back in his
chair, flushed and defiant.

Giraud smiled, then, moving his chair back a little, said:

“That is all. You would, without doubt, prefer to continue the
interrogatory, M. le juge.”

“Ah, yes, exactly,” said M. Hautet. “And what was the subject of your
quarrel?”

“I decline to state.”

M. Hautet sat up in his chair.

“M. Renauld, it is not permitted to trifle with the law!” he thundered.
“What was the subject of the quarrel?”

Young Renauld remained silent, his boyish face sullen and overcast. But
another voice spoke, imperturbable and calm, the voice of Hercule
Poirot.

“I will inform you, if you like, M. le juge.”

“You know?”

“Certainly I know. The subject of the quarrel was Mademoiselle Marthe
Daubreuil.”

Renauld sprang round, startled. The magistrate leaned forward.

“Is this so, monsieur.”

Jack Renauld bowed his head.

“Yes,” he admitted. “I love Mademoiselle Daubreuil, and I wish to marry
her. When I informed my father of the fact, he flew at once into a
violent rage. Naturally I could not stand hearing the girl I loved
insulted, and I, too, lost my temper.”

M. Hautet looked across at Mrs. Renauld.

“You were aware of this—attachment, madame.”

“I feared it,” she replied simply.

“Mother,” cried the boy. “You too! Marthe is as good as she is
beautiful. What can you have against her?”

“I have nothing against Mademoiselle Daubreuil in any way. But I should
prefer you to marry an Englishwoman, or if a Frenchwoman not one who
has a mother of doubtful antecedents!”

Her rancour against the older woman showed plainly in her voice, and I
could well understand that it must have been a bitter blow to her when
her only son showed signs of falling in love with the daughter of her
rival.

Mrs. Renauld continued, addressing the magistrate:

“I ought, perhaps, to have spoken to my husband on the subject, but I
hoped that it was only a boy and girl flirtation which would blow over
all the quicker if no notice was taken of it. I blame myself now for my
silence, but my husband, as I told you, had seemed so anxious and
care-worn, different altogether from his normal self, that I was
chiefly concerned not to give him any additional worry.”

M. Hautet nodded.

“When you informed your father of your intentions towards Mademoiselle
Daubreuil,” he resumed, “he was surprised?”

“He seemed completely taken aback. Then he ordered me peremptorily to
dismiss any such idea from my mind. He would never give his consent to
such a marriage. Nettled, I demanded what he had against Mademoiselle
Daubreuil. To that he could give no satisfactory reply, but spoke in
slighting terms of the mystery surrounding the lives of the mother and
daughter. I answered that I was marrying Marthe, and not her
antecedents, but he shouted me down with a peremptory refusal to
discuss the matter in any way. The whole thing must be given up. The
injustice and high-handedness of it all maddened me—especially since he
himself always seemed to go out of his way to be attentive to the
Daubreuils and was always suggesting that they should be asked to the
house. I lost my head, and we quarrelled in earnest. My father reminded
me that I was entirely dependent on him, and it must have been in
answer to that that I made the remark about doing as I pleased after
his death—”

Poirot interrupted with a quick question.

“You were aware, then, of the terms of your father’s will?”

“I knew that he had left half his fortune to me, the other half in
trust for my mother to come to me at her death,” replied the lad.

“Proceed with your story,” said the magistrate.

“After that we shouted at each other in sheer rage, until I suddenly
realized that I was in danger of missing my train to Paris. I had to
run for the station, still in a white heat of fury. However, once well
away, I calmed down. I wrote to Marthe, telling her what had happened,
and her reply soothed me still further. She pointed out to me that we
had only to be steadfast, and any opposition was bound to give way at
last. Our affection for each other must be tried and proved, and when
my parents realized that it was no light infatuation on my part they
would doubtless relent towards us. Of course, to her, I had not dwelt
on my father’s principal objection to the match. I soon saw that I
should do my cause no good by violence. My father wrote me several
letters to Paris, affectionate in tone, and which did not refer to our
disagreement or its cause, and I replied in the same strain.”

“You can produce those letters, eh?” said Giraud.

“I did not keep them.”

“No matter,” said the detective.

Renauld looked at him for a moment, but the magistrate was continuing
his questions.

“To pass to another matter, are you acquainted with the name of Duveen,
M. Renauld?”

“Duveen?” said Jack. “Duveen?” He leant forward, and slowly picked up
the paper-knife he had swept from the table. As he lifted his head, his
eyes met the watching ones of Giraud. “Duveen? No, I can’t say I am.”

“Will you read this letter, M. Renauld? And tell me if you have any
idea as to who the person was who addressed it to your father?”

Jack Renauld took the letter, and read it through, the colour mounting
in his face as he did so.

“Addressed to my father?” The emotion and indignation in his tones were
evident.

“Yes. We found it in the pocket of his coat.”

“Does—” He hesitated, throwing the merest fraction of a glance towards
his mother. The magistrate understood.

“As yet—no. Can you give us any clue as to the writer?”

“I have no idea whatsoever.”

M. Hautet sighed.

“A most mysterious case. Ah, well, I suppose we can now rule out the
letter altogether. What do you think, M. Giraud? It does not seem to
lead us anywhere.”

“It certainly does not,” agreed the detective with emphasis.

“And yet,” sighed the magistrate, “it promised at the beginning to be
such a beautiful and simple case!” He caught Mrs. Renauld’s eye, and
blushed in immediate confusion. “Ah, yes,” he coughed, turning over the
papers on the table. “Let me see, where were we? Oh, the weapon. I fear
this may give you pain, M. Renauld. I understand it was a present from
you to your mother. Very sad—very distressing—”

Jack Renauld leaned forward. His face, which had flushed during the
perusal of the letter, was now deadly white.

“Do you mean—that it was with an aeroplane wire paper cutter that my
father was—was killed? But it’s impossible! A little thing like that!”

“Alas, M. Renauld, it is only too true! An ideal little tool, I fear.
Sharp and easy to handle.”

“Where is it? Can I see it? Is it still in the—the body?”

“Oh, no, it had been removed. You would like to see it? To make sure?
It would be as well, perhaps, though madame has already identified it.
Still—M. Bex, might I trouble you?”

“Certainly, M. le juge. I will fetch it immediately.”

“Would it not be better to take M. Renauld to the shed?” suggested
Giraud smoothly. “Without doubt he would wish to see his father’s
body.”

The boy made a shivering gesture of negation, and the magistrate,
always disposed to cross Giraud whenever possible, replied.

“But no—not at present. M. Bex will be so kind as to bring it to us
here.”

The commissary left the room. Stonor crossed to Jack, and wrung him by
the hand. Poirot had risen and was adjusting a pair of candlesticks
that struck his trained eye as being a shade askew. The magistrate was
reading the mysterious love-letter through a last time, clinging
desperately to his first theory of jealousy and a stab in the back.

Suddenly the door burst open and the commissary rushed in.

“M. le juge! M. le juge!”

“But yes. What is it?”

“The dagger! It is gone!”

“_Comment___—gone?”

“Vanished. Disappeared. The glass jar that contained it is empty!”

“What?” I cried. “Impossible. Why, only this morning I saw—” The words
died on my tongue.

But the attention of the entire room was diverted to me.

“What is that you say?” cried the commissary. “This morning?”

“I saw it there this morning,” I said slowly. “About an hour and a half
ago, to be accurate.”

“You went to the shed, then? How did you get the key?”

“I asked the _sergent de ville___ for it.”

“And you went there? Why?”

I hesitated, but in the end I decided that the only thing to do was to
make a clean breast of it.

“M. le juge,” I said. “I have committed a grave fault, for which I must
crave your indulgence.”

“_Eh bien!___ Proceed, monsieur.”

“The fact of the matter is,” I said, wishing myself anywhere else than
where I was, “that I met a young lady, an acquaintance of mine. She
displayed a great desire to see everything that was to be seen, and
I—well, in short, I took the key to show her the body.”

“Ah, _par exemple___,” cried the magistrate indignantly. “But it is a
grave fault you have committed there, Captain Hastings. It is
altogether most irregular. You should not have permitted yourself this
folly.”

“I know,” I said meekly. “Nothing that you can say could be too severe,
M. le juge.”

“You did not invite this lady to come here?”

“Certainly not. I met her quite by accident. She is an English lady who
happens to be staying in Merlinville, though I was not aware of that
until my unexpected meeting with her.”

“Well, well,” said the magistrate, softening. “It was most irregular,
but the lady is without doubt young and beautiful, _n’est-ce pas?___
What it is to be young! _O jeunesse, jeunesse!___” And he sighed
sentimentally.

But the commissary, less romantic, and more practical, took up the
tale:

“But did not you reclose and lock the door when you departed.”

“That’s just it,” I said slowly. “That’s what I blame myself for so
terribly. My friend was upset at the sight. She nearly fainted. I got
her some brandy and water, and afterwards insisted on accompanying her
back to town. In the excitement, I forgot to relock the door. I only
did so when I got back to the Villa.”

“Then for twenty minutes at least—” said the commissary slowly. He
stopped.

“Exactly,” I said.

“Twenty minutes,” mused the commissary.

“It is deplorable,” said M. Hautet, his sternness of manner returning.
“Without precedent.”

Suddenly another voice spoke.

“You find it deplorable, M. le juge?” asked Giraud.

“Certainly I do.”

“_Eh bien!___ I find it admirable,” said the other imperturbably.

This unexpected ally quite bewildered me.

“Admirable, M. Giraud?” asked the magistrate, studying him cautiously
out of the corner of his eye.

“Precisely.”

“And why?”

“Because we know now that the assassin, or an accomplice of the
assassin, has been near the Villa only an hour ago. It will be strange
if, with that knowledge, we do not shortly lay hands upon him.” There
was a note of menace in his voice. He continued: “He risked a good deal
to gain possession of that dagger. Perhaps he feared that finger-prints
might be discovered on it.”

Poirot turned to Bex.

“You said there were none?”

Giraud shrugged his shoulders.

“Perhaps he could not be sure.”

Poirot looked at him.

“You are wrong, M. Giraud. The assassin wore gloves. So he must have
been sure.”

“I do not say it was the assassin himself. It may have been an
accomplice who was not aware of that fact.”

“_Ils sont mal renseignés, les accomplices!___” muttered Poirot, but he
said no more.

The magistrate’s clerk was gathering up the papers on the table. M.
Hautet addressed us:

“Our work here is finished. Perhaps, M. Renauld, you will listen whilst
your evidence is read over to you. I have purposely kept all the
proceedings as informal as possible. I have been called original in my
methods, but I maintain that there is much to be said for originality.
The case is now in the clever hands of the renowned M. Giraud. He will
without doubt distinguish himself. Indeed, I wonder that he has not
already laid his hands upon the murderers! Madame, again let me assure
you of my heart-felt sympathy. Messieurs, I wish you all good day.”
And, accompanied by his clerk and the commissary, he took his
departure.

Poirot tugged out that large turnip of a watch of his, and observed the
time.

“Let us return to the hotel for lunch, my friend,” he said. “And you
shall recount to me in full the indiscretions of this morning. No one
is observing us. We need make no adieux.”

We went quietly out of the room. The examining magistrate had just
driven off in his car. I was going down the steps when Poirot’s voice
arrested me:

“One little moment, my friend.” Dexterously, he whipped out his yard
measure, and proceeded, quite solemnly, to measure an overcoat hanging
in the hall from the collar to the hem. I had not seen it hanging there
before, and guessed that it belonged to either Mr. Stonor, or Jack
Renauld.

Then, with a little satisfied grunt, Poirot returned the measure to his
pocket, and followed me out into the open air.




12 Poirot Elucidates Certain Points

“Why did you measure that overcoat?” I asked, with some curiosity, as
we walked down the hot white road at a leisurely pace.

“_Parbleu!___ to see how long it was,” replied my friend imperturbably.

I was vexed. Poirot’s incurable habit of making a mystery out of
nothing never failed to irritate me. I relapsed into silence, and
followed a train of thought of my own. Although I had not noticed them
specially at the time, certain words Mrs. Renauld had addressed to her
son now recurred to me, fraught with a new significance. “So you did
not sail?” she had said, and then had added: “_After all, it does not
matter—now.___”

What had she meant by that? The words were enigmatical—significant. Was
it possible that she knew more than we supposed? She had denied all
knowledge of the mysterious mission with which her husband was to have
entrusted his son. But was she really less ignorant than she pretended?
Could she enlighten us if she chose, and was her silence part of a
carefully thought out and preconceived plan?

The more I thought about it, the more I was convinced that I was right.
Mrs. Renauld knew more than she chose to tell. In her surprise at
seeing her son, she had momentarily betrayed herself. I felt convinced
that she knew, if not the assassins, at least the motive for the
assassination. But some very powerful considerations must keep her
silent.

“You think profoundly, my friend,” remarked Poirot, breaking in upon my
reflections. “What is it that intrigues you so?”

I told him, sure of my ground, though feeling expectant that he would
ridicule my suspicions. But to my surprise he nodded thoughtfully.

“You are quite right, Hastings. From the beginning I have been sure
that she was keeping something back. At first I suspected her, if not
of inspiring, at least of conniving at the crime.”

“You suspected _her?___” I cried.

“But certainly! She benefits enormously—in fact, by this new will, she
is the only person to benefit. So, from the start, she was singled out
for attention. You may have noticed that I took an early opportunity of
examining her wrists. I wished to see whether there was any possibility
that she had gagged and bound herself. _Eh bien___, I saw at once that
there was no fake, the cords had actually been drawn so tight as to cut
into the flesh. That ruled out the possibility of her having committed
the crime single-handed. But it was still possible for her to have
connived at it, or to have been the instigator with an accomplice.
Moreover, the story, as she told it, was singularly familiar to me—the
masked men that she could not recognize, the mention of ‘the secret’—I
had heard, or read, all these things before. Another little detail
confirmed my belief that she was not speaking the truth. _The wrist
watch, Hastings, the wrist watch!___”

Again that wrist watch! Poirot was eyeing me curiously.

“You see, _mon ami?___ You comprehend?”

“No,” I replied with some ill humour. “I neither see nor comprehend.
You make all these confounded mysteries, and it’s useless asking you to
explain. You always like keeping everything up your sleeve to the last
minute.”

“Do not enrage yourself, my friend,” said Poirot with a smile. “I will
explain if you wish. But not a word to Giraud, _c’est entendu?___ He
treats me as an old one of no importance! _We shall see!___ In common
fairness I gave him a hint. If he does not choose to act upon it, that
is his own look out.”

I assured Poirot that he could rely upon my discretion.

“_C’est bien!___ Let us then employ our little grey cells. Tell me, my
friend, at what time, according to you, did the tragedy take place?”

“Why, at two o’clock or thereabouts,” I said, astonished. “You
remember, Mrs. Renauld told us that she heard the clock strike while
the men were in the room.”

“Exactly, and on the strength of that, you, the examining magistrate,
Bex, and every one else, accept the time without further question. But
I, Hercule Poirot, say that Madame Renauld lied. _The crime took place
at least two hours earlier.___”

“But the doctors—”

“They declared, after examination of the body, that death had taken
place between ten and seven hours previously. _Mon ami___, for some
reason, it was imperative that the crime should seem to have taken
place later than it actually did. You have read of a smashed watch or
clock recording the exact hour of a crime? So that the time should not
rest on Mrs. Renauld’s testimony alone, some one moved on the hands of
that wrist watch to two o’clock, and then dashed it violently to the
ground. But, as is often the case, they defeated their own object. The
glass was smashed, but the mechanism of the watch was uninjured. It was
a most disastrous manoeuvre on their part, for it at once drew my
attention to two points—first, that Madame Renauld was lying: secondly,
that there must be some vital reason for the postponement of the time.”

“But what reason could there be?”

“Ah, that is the question! There we have the whole mystery. As yet, I
cannot explain it. There is only one idea that presents itself to me as
having a possible connection.”

“And that is?”

“The last train left Merlinville at seventeen minutes past twelve.”

I followed it out slowly.

“So that, the crime apparently taking place some two hours later, any
one leaving by that train would have an unimpeachable alibi!”

“Perfect, Hastings! You have it!”

I sprang up.

“But we must inquire at the station. Surely they cannot have failed to
notice two foreigners who left by that train! We must go there at
once!”

“You think so, Hastings?”

“Of course. Let us go there now.”

Poirot restrained my ardour with a light touch upon the arm.

“Go by all means if you wish, _mon ami___—but if you go, I should not
ask for particulars of two foreigners.”

I stared, and he said rather impatiently:

“Là, là, you do not believe all that rigmarole, do you? The masked men
and all the rest of _cette histoire-là!___”

His words took me so much aback that I hardly knew how to respond. He
went on serenely:

“You heard me say to Giraud, did you not, that all the details of this
crime were familiar to me? _Eh bien___, that presupposes one of two
things, either the brain that planned the first crime also planned this
one, or else an account read of a _cause célèbre___ unconsciously
remained in our assassin’s memory and prompted the details. I shall be
able to pronounce definitely on that after—” he broke off.

I was revolving sundry matters in my mind.

“But Mr. Renauld’s letter? It distinctly mentions a secret and
Santiago?”

“Undoubtedly there was a secret in M. Renauld’s life—there can be no
doubt of that. On the other hand, the word Santiago, to my mind, is a
red herring, dragged continually across the track to put us off the
scent. It is possible that it was used in the same way on M. Renauld,
to keep him from directing his suspicions into a quarter nearer at
hand. Oh, be assured, Hastings, the danger that threatened him was not
in Santiago, it was near at hand, in France.”

He spoke so gravely, and with such assurance, that I could not fail to
be convinced. But I essayed one final objection:

“And the match and cigarette end found near the body? What of them.”

A light of pure enjoyment lit up Poirot’s face.

“Planted! Deliberately planted there for Giraud or one of his tribe to
find! Ah, he is smart, Giraud, he can do his tricks! So can a good
retriever dog. He comes in so pleased with himself. For hours he has
crawled on his stomach. ‘See what I have found,’ he says. And then
again to me: ‘What do you see here?’ Me, I answer, with profound and
deep truth, ‘Nothing.’ And Giraud, the great Giraud, he laughs, he
thinks to himself, ‘Oh, that he is imbecile, this old one!’ _But we
shall see.…___”

But my mind had reverted to the main facts.

“Then all this story of the masked men—?”

“Is false.”

“What really happened?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“One person could tell us—Madame Renauld. But she will not speak.
Threats and entreaties would not move her. A remarkable woman that,
Hastings. I recognized as soon as I saw her that I had to deal with a
woman of unusual character. At first, as I told you, I was inclined to
suspect her of being concerned in the crime. Afterwards I altered my
opinion.”

“What made you do that?”

“Her spontaneous and genuine grief at the sight of her husband’s body.
I could swear that the agony in that cry of hers was genuine.”

“Yes,” I said thoughtfully, “one cannot mistake these things.”

“I beg your pardon, my friend—one can always be mistaken. Regard a
great actress, does not her acting of grief carry you away and impress
you with its reality? No, however strong my own impression and belief,
I needed other evidence before I allowed myself to be satisfied. The
great criminal can be a great actor. I base my certainty in this case,
not upon my own impression, but upon the undeniable fact that Mrs.
Renauld actually fainted. I turned up her eyelids and felt her pulse.
There was no deception—the swoon was genuine. Therefore I was satisfied
that her anguish was real and not assumed. Besides, a small additional
point not without interest, it was unnecessary for Mrs. Renauld to
exhibit unrestrained grief. She had had one paroxysm on learning of her
husband’s death, and there would be no need for her to simulate another
such a violent one on beholding his body. No, Mrs. Renauld was not her
husband’s murderess. But why has she lied? She lied about the wrist
watch, she lied about the masked men—she lied about a third thing. Tell
me, Hastings, what is your explanation of the open door?”

“Well,” I said, rather embarrassed, “I suppose it was an oversight.
They forgot to shut it.”

Poirot shook his head, and sighed.

“That is the explanation of Giraud. It does not satisfy me. There is a
meaning behind that open door which for a moment I cannot fathom.”

“I have an idea,” I cried suddenly.

“_A la bonne heure!___ Let us hear it.”

“Listen. We are agreed that Mrs. Renauld’s story is a fabrication. Is
it not possible, then, that Mr. Renauld left the house to keep an
appointment—possibly with the murderer—leaving the front door open for
his return. But he did not return, and the next morning he is found,
stabbed in the back.”

“An admirable theory, Hastings, but for two facts which you have
characteristically overlooked. In the first place, who gagged and bound
Madame Renauld? And why on earth should they return to the house to do
so? In the second place, no man on earth would go out to keep an
appointment wearing his underclothes and an overcoat. There are
circumstances in which a man might wear pajamas and an overcoat—but the
other, never!”

“True,” I said, rather crest-fallen.

“No,” continued Poirot, “we must look elsewhere for a solution of the
open door mystery. One thing I am fairly sure of—they did not leave
through the door. They left by the window.”

“What?”

“Precisely.”

“But there were no footmarks in the flower bed underneath.”

“No—_and there ought to have been.___ Listen, Hastings. The gardener,
Auguste, as you heard him say, planted both those beds the preceding
afternoon. In the one there are plentiful impressions of his big
hobnailed boots—in the other, _none!___ You see? Some one had passed
that way, some one who, to obliterate their footprints, smoothed over
the surface of the bed with a rake.”

“Where did they get a rake?”

“Where they got the spade and the gardening gloves,” said Poirot
impatiently. “There is no difficulty about that.”

“What makes you think that they left that way, though? Surely it is
more probable that they entered by the window, and left by the door.”

“That is possible of course. Yet I have a strong idea that they left by
the window.”

“I think you are wrong.”

“Perhaps, _mon ami___.”

I mused, thinking over the new field of conjecture that Poirot’s
deductions had opened up to me. I recalled my wonder at his cryptic
allusions to the flower bed and the wrist watch. His remarks had seemed
so meaningless at the moment and now, for the first time, I realized
how remarkably, from a few slight incidents, he had unravelled much of
the mystery that surrounded the case. I paid a belated homage to my
friend. As though he read my thoughts, he nodded sagely.

“Method, you comprehend! Method! Arrange your facts. Arrange your
ideas. And if some little fact will not fit in—do not reject it but
consider it closely. Though its significance escapes you, be sure that
it is significant.”

“In the meantime,” I said, considering, “although we know a great deal
more than we did, we are no nearer to solving the mystery of who killed
Mr. Renauld.”

“No,” said Poirot cheerfully. “In fact we are a great deal further
off.”

The fact seemed to afford him such peculiar satisfaction that I gazed
at him in wonder. He met my eye and smiled.

“But yes, it is better so. Before, there was at all events a clear
theory as to how and by whose hands he met his death. Now that is all
gone. We are in darkness. A hundred conflicting points confuse and
worry us. That is well. That is excellent. Out of confusion comes forth
order. But if you find order to start with, if a crime seems simple and
above-board, _eh bien, méfiez vous!___ It is, how do you say
it?—_cooked!___ The great criminal is simple—but very few criminals
_are___ great. In trying to cover up their tracks, they invariably
betray themselves. Ah, _mon ami___, I would that some day I could meet
a really great criminal—one who commits his crime, and then—does
nothing! Even I, Hercule Poirot, might fail to catch such a one.”

But I had not followed his words. A light had burst upon me.

“Poirot! Mrs. Renauld! I see it now. She must be shielding somebody.”

From the quietness with which Poirot received my remark, I could see
that the idea had already occurred to him.

“Yes,” he said thoughtfully. “Shielding some one—or screening some one.
One of the two.”

I saw very little difference between the two words, but I developed my
theme with a good deal of earnestness. Poirot maintained a strictly
non-committal attitude, repeating:

“It may be—yes, it may be. But as yet I do not know! There is something
very deep underneath all this. You will see. Something very deep.”

Then, as we entered our hotel, he enjoined silence on me with a
gesture.




13 The Girl with the Anxious Eyes

We lunched with an excellent appetite. I understood well enough that
Poirot did not wish to discuss the tragedy where we could so easily be
overheard. But, as is usual when one topic fills the mind to the
exclusion of everything else, no other subject of interest seemed to
present itself. For a while we ate in silence, and then Poirot observed
maliciously:

“_Eh bien!___ And your indiscretions! You recount them not?”

I felt myself blushing.

“Oh, you mean this morning?” I endeavoured to adopt a tone of absolute
nonchalance.

But I was no match for Poirot. In a very few minutes he had extracted
the whole story from me, his eyes twinkling as he did so.

“_Tiens!___ A story of the most romantic. What is her name, this
charming young lady?”

I had to confess that I did not know.

“Still more romantic! The first _rencontre___ in the train from Paris,
the second here. Journeys end in lovers’ meetings, is not that the
saying?”

“Don’t be an ass, Poirot.”

“Yesterday it was Mademoiselle Daubreuil, today it is
Mademoiselle—Cinderella! Decidedly you have the heart of a Turk,
Hastings! You should establish a harem!”

“It’s all very well to rag me. Mademoiselle Daubreuil is a very
beautiful girl, and I do admire her immensely—I don’t mind admitting
it. The other’s nothing—don’t suppose I shall ever see her again. She
was quite amusing to talk to just for a railway journey, but she’s not
the kind of girl I should ever get keen on.”

“Why?”

“Well—it sounds snobbish perhaps—but she’s not a lady, not in any sense
of the word.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully. There was less raillery in his voice as he
asked:

“You believe, then, in birth and breeding?”

“I may be old-fashioned, but I certainly don’t believe in marrying out
of one’s class. It never answers.”

“I agree with you, _mon ami___. Ninety-nine times out of a hundred, it
is as you say. But there is always the hundredth time! Still, that does
not arise, as you do not propose to see the lady again.”

His last words were almost a question, and I was aware of the sharpness
with which he darted a glance at me. And before my eyes, writ large in
letters of fire, I saw the words “Hôtel du Phare,” and I heard again
her voice saying “Come and look me up” and my own answering with
_empressement___: “I will.”

Well, what of it? I had meant to go at the time. But since then, I had
had time to reflect. I did not like the girl. Thinking it over in cold
blood, I came definitely to the conclusion that I disliked her
intensely. I had got hauled over the coals for foolishly gratifying her
morbid curiosity, and I had not the least wish to see her again.

I answered Poirot lightly enough.

“She asked me to look her up, but of course I shan’t.”

“Why ‘of course’?”

“Well—I don’t want to.”

“I see.” He studied me attentively for some minutes. “Yes. I see very
well. And you are wise. Stick to what you have said.”

“That seems to be your invariable advice,” I remarked, rather piqued.

“Ah, my friend, have faith in Papa Poirot. Some day, if you permit, I
will arrange you a marriage of great suitability.”

“Thank you,” I said laughing, “but the prospect leaves me cold.”

Poirot sighed and shook his head.

“_Les Anglais!___” he murmured. “No method—absolutely none whatever.
They leave all to chance!” He frowned, and altered the position of the
salt cellar.

“Mademoiselle Cinderella is staying at the Hôtel d’Angleterre you told
me, did you not?”

“No. Hôtel du Phare.”

“True, I forgot.”

A moment’s misgiving shot across my mind. Surely I had never mentioned
any hotel to Poirot. I looked across at him, and felt reassured. He was
cutting his bread into neat little squares, completely absorbed in his
task. He must have fancied I had told him where the girl was staying.

We had coffee outside facing the sea. Poirot smoked one of his tiny
cigarettes, and then drew his watch from his pocket.

“The train to Paris leaves at 2:25,” he observed. “I should be
starting.”

“Paris?” I cried.

“That is what I said, _mon ami___.”

“You are going to Paris? But why?”

He replied very seriously.

“To look for the murderer of M. Renauld.”

“You think he is in Paris?”

“I am quite certain that he is not. Nevertheless, it is there that I
must look for him. You do not understand, but I will explain it all to
you in good time. Believe me, this journey to Paris is necessary. I
shall not be away long. In all probability I shall return tomorrow. I
do not propose that you should accompany me. Remain here and keep an
eye on Giraud. Also cultivate the society of M. Renauld _fils___. And
thirdly, if you wish, endeavour to cut him out with Mademoiselle
Marthe. But I fear you will not have great success.”

I did not quite relish the last remark.

“That reminds me,” I said. “I meant to ask you how you knew about those
two?”

“_Mon ami___—I know human nature. Throw together a boy young Renauld
and a beautiful girl like Mademoiselle Marthe, and the result is almost
inevitable. Then, the quarrel! It was money or a woman and, remembering
Léonie’s description of the lad’s anger, I decided on the latter. So I
made my guess—and I was right.”

“And that was why you warned me against setting my heart on the lady?
You already suspected that she loved young Renauld?”

Poirot smiled.

“At any rate—_I saw that she had anxious eyes.___ That is how always
think of Mademoiselle Daubreuil _as the girl with the anxious
eyes.…___”

His voice was so grave that it impressed me uncomfortably.

“What do you mean by that, Poirot?”

“I fancy, my friend, that we shall see before very long. But I must
start.”

“You’ve oceans of time.”

“Perhaps—perhaps. But I like plenty of leisure at the station. I do not
wish to rush, to hurry, to excite myself.”

“At all events,” I said, rising, “I will come and see you off.”

“You will do nothing of the sort. I forbid it.”

He was so peremptory that I stared at him in surprise. He nodded
emphatically.

“I mean it, _mon ami___. Au revoir! You permit that I embrace you? Ah,
no, I forget that it is not the English custom. Une poignee de main,
alors.”

I felt rather at a loose end after Poirot had left me. I strolled down
the beach, and watched the bathers, without feeling energetic enough to
join them. I rather fancied that Cinderella might be disporting herself
amongst them in some wonderful costume, but I saw no signs of her. I
strolled aimlessly along the sands towards the further end of the town.
It occurred to me that, after all, it would only be decent feeling on
my part to inquire after the girl. And it would save trouble in the
end. The matter would then be finished with. There would be no need for
me to trouble about her any further. But, if I did not go at all, she
might quite possibly come and look me up at the Villa. And that would
be annoying in every way. Decidedly it would be better to pay a short
call, in the course of which I could make it quite clear that I could
do nothing further for her in my capacity of showman.

Accordingly I left the beach, and walked inland. I soon found the Hôtel
du Phare, a very unpretentious building. It was annoying in the extreme
not to know the lady’s name and, to save my dignity, I decided to
stroll inside and look around. Probably I should find her in the
lounge. Merlinville was a small place, you left your hotel to go to the
beach, and you left the beach to return to the hotel. There were no
other attractions. There was a Casino being built, but it was not yet
completed.

I had walked the length of the beach without seeing her, therefore she
must be in the hotel. I went in. Several people were sitting in the
tiny lounge, but my quarry was not amongst them. I looked into some
other rooms, but there was no sign of her. I waited for some time, till
my impatience got the better of me. I took the concierge aside, and
slipped five francs into his hand.

“I wish to see a lady who is staying here. A young English lady, small
and dark. I am not sure of her name.”

The man shook his head, and seemed to be suppressing a grin.

“There is no such lady as you describe staying here.”

“She is American possibly,” I suggested. These fellows are so stupid.

But the man continued to shake his head.

“No, monsieur. There are only six or seven English and American ladies
altogether, and they are all much older than the lady you are seeking.
It is not here that you will find her, monsieur.”

He was so positive that I felt doubts.

“But the lady told me she was staying here.”

“Monsieur must have made a mistake—or it is more likely the lady did,
since there has been another gentleman here inquiring for her.”

“What is that you say?” I cried, surprised.

“But yes, monsieur. A gentleman who described her just as you have
done.”

“What was he like?”

“He was a small gentleman, well dressed, very neat, very spotless, the
moustache very stiff, the head of a peculiar shape, and the eyes
green.”

Poirot! So that was why he refused to let me accompany him to the
station. The impertinence of it! I would thank him not to meddle in my
concerns. Did he fancy I needed a nurse to look after me? Thanking the
man, I departed, somewhat at a loss, and still much incensed with my
meddlesome friend. I regretted that he was, for the moment, out of
reach. I should have enjoyed telling him what I thought of his
unwarranted interference. Had I not distinctly told him that I had no
intention of seeing the girl? Decidedly, one’s friends can be too
zealous!

But where was the lady? I set aside my wrath, and tried to puzzle it
out. Evidently, through inadvertence, she had named the wrong hotel.
Then another thought struck me. Was it inadvertence? Or had she
deliberately withheld her name and given me the wrong address? The more
I thought about it, the more I felt convinced that this last surmise of
mine was right. For some reason or other she did not wish to let the
acquaintance ripen into friendship. And though half an hour earlier
this had been precisely my own view, I did not enjoy having the tables
turned upon me. The whole affair was profoundly unsatisfactory, and I
went up to the Villa Geneviève in a condition of distinct ill humour. I
did not go to the house, but went up the path to the little bench by
the shed, and sat there moodily enough.

I was distracted from my thoughts by the sound of voices close at hand.
In a second or two I realized that they came, not from the garden I was
in, but from the adjoining garden of the Villa Marguerite, and that
they were approaching rapidly. A girl’s voice was speaking, a voice
that I recognized as that of the beautiful Marthe.

“_Chéri___,” she was saying, “is it really true? Are all our troubles
over.”

“You know it, Marthe,” Jack Renauld replied. “Nothing can part us now,
beloved. The last obstacle to our union is removed. Nothing can take
you from me.”

“Nothing?” the girl murmured. “Oh, Jack, Jack—I am afraid.”

I had moved to depart, realizing that I was quite unintentionally
eavesdropping. As I rose to my feet, I caught sight of them through a
gap in the hedge. They stood together facing me, the man’s arm round
the girl, his eyes looking into hers. They were a splendid looking
couple, the dark, well-knit boy, and the fair young goddess. They
seemed made for each other as they stood there, happy in spite of the
terrible tragedy that overshadowed their young lives.

But the girl’s face was troubled, and Jack Renauld seemed to recognize
it, as he held her closer to him and asked:

“But what are you afraid of, darling? What is there to fear—now?”

And then I saw the look in her eyes, the look Poirot had spoken of, as
she murmured, so that I almost guessed at the words.

“I am afraid—for _you___.…”

I did not hear young Renauld’s answer, for my attention was distracted
by an unusual appearance a little further down the hedge. There
appeared to be a brown bush there, which seemed odd, to say the least
of it, so early in the summer. I stepped along to investigate, but, at
my advance, the brown bush withdrew itself precipitately, and faced me
with a finger to its lips. It was Giraud.

Enjoining caution, he led the way round the shed until we were out of
ear-shot.

“What were you doing there?” I asked.

“Exactly what you were doing—listening.”

“But I was not there on purpose!”

“Ah!” said Giraud. “I was.”

As always, I admired the man whilst disliking him. He looked me up and
down with a sort of contemptuous disfavour.

“You didn’t help matters by butting in. I might have heard something
useful in a minute. What have you done with your old fossil?”

“M. Poirot has gone to Paris,” I replied coldly.

“And I can tell you, M. Giraud, that he is anything but an old fossil.
He has solved many cases that have completely baffled the English
police.”

“Bah! The English police!” Giraud snapped his fingers disdainfully.
“They must be on a level with our examining magistrates. So he has gone
to Paris, has he? Well, a good thing. The longer he stays there, the
better. But what does he think he will find there?”

I thought I read in the question a tinge of uneasiness. I drew myself
up.

“That I am not at liberty to say,” I said quietly.

Giraud subjected me to a piercing stare.

“He has probably enough sense not to tell _you___,” he remarked rudely.
“Good afternoon. I’m busy.”

And with that, he turned on his heel, and left me without ceremony.
Matters seemed at a standstill at the Villa Geneviève. Giraud evidently
did not desire my company and, from what I had seen, it seemed fairly
certain that Jack Renauld did not either.

I went back to the town, had an enjoyable bath and returned to the
hotel. I turned in early, wondering whether the following day would
bring forth anything of interest.

I was wholly unprepared for what it did bring forth. I was eating my
petit déjeuner in the dining-room, when the waiter, who had been
talking to some one outside, came back in obvious excitement. He
hesitated for a minute, fidgeting with his napkin, and then burst out.

“Monsieur will pardon me, but he is connected, is he not, with the
affair at the Villa Geneviève?’

“Yes,” I said eagerly. “Why?”

“Monsieur has not heard the news, though?”

“What news?”

“That there has been another murder there last night!”

“_What?___”

Leaving my breakfast, I caught up my hat and ran as fast as I could.
Another murder—and Poirot away! What fatality. But who had been
murdered?

I dashed in at the gate. A group of the servants was in the drive,
talking and gesticulating. I caught hold of Françoise.

“What has happened?”

“Oh, monsieur! monsieur! Another death! It is terrible. There is a
curse upon the house. But yes, I say it, a curse! They should send for
M. le curé to bring some holy water. Never will I sleep another night
under that roof. It might be my turn, who knows?”

She crossed herself.

“Yes,” I cried, “but who has been killed?”

“Do I know—me? A man—a stranger. They found him up there—in the
shed—not a hundred yards from where they found poor Monsieur. And that
is not all. He is stabbed—stabbed to the heart _with the same
dagger!___”




14 The Second Body

Waiting for no more, I turned and ran up the path to the shed. The two
men on guard there stood aside to let me pass and, filled with
excitement, I entered.

The light was dim, the place was a mere rough wooden erection to keep
old pots and tools in. I had entered impetuously, but on the threshold
I checked myself, fascinated by the spectacle before me.

Giraud was on his hands and knees, a pocket torch in his hand with
which he was examining every inch of the ground. He looked up with a
frown at my entrance, then his face relaxed a little in a sort of
good-humoured contempt.

“Ah, _c’est l’Anglais!___ Enter then. Let us see what you can make of
this affair.”

Rather stung by his tone, I stooped my head, and passed in.

“There he is,” said Giraud, flashing his torch to the far corner.

I stepped across.

The dead man lay straight upon his back. He was of medium height,
swarthy of complexion, and possibly about fifty years of age. He was
neatly dressed in a dark blue suit, well cut and probably made by an
expensive tailor, but not new. His face was terribly convulsed, and on
his left side, just over the heart, the hilt of a dagger stood up,
black and shining. I recognized it. It was the same dagger I had seen
reposing in the glass jar the preceding morning!

“I’m expecting the doctor any minute,” explained Giraud. “Although we
hardly need him. There’s no doubt what the man died of. He was stabbed
to the heart, and death must have been pretty well instantaneous.”

“When was it done? Last night?”

Giraud shook his head.

“Hardly. I don’t lay down the law on medical evidence, but the man’s
been dead well over twelve hours. When do you say you last saw that
dagger?”

“About ten o’clock yesterday morning.”

“Then I should be inclined to fix the crime as being done not long
after that.”

“But people were passing and repassing this shed continually.”

Giraud laughed disagreeably.

“You progress to a marvel! Who told you he was killed in this shed?”

“Well—” I felt flustered. “I—I assumed it.”

“Oh, what a fine detective! Look at him, _mon petit___—does a man
stabbed to the heart fall like that—neatly with his feet together, and
his arms to his side? No. Again does a man lie down on his back and
permit himself to be stabbed without raising a hand to defend himself?
It is absurd, is it not? But see here—and here—” He flashed the torch
along the ground. I saw curious irregular marks in the soft dirt. “He
was dragged here after he was dead. Half dragged, half carried by two
people. Their tracks do not show on the hard ground outside, and here
they have been careful to obliterate them—but one of the two was a
woman, my young friend.”

“A woman?”

“Yes.”

“But if the tracks are obliterated, how do you know?”

“Because, blurred as they are, the prints of the woman’s shoe are
unmistakable. Also, by _this___—” And, leaning forward, he drew
something from the handle of the dagger and held it up for me to see.
It was a woman’s long black hair—similar to the one Poirot had taken
from the arm-chair in the library.

With a slightly ironic smile he wound it round the dagger again.

“We will leave things as they are as much as possible,” he explained.
“It pleases the examining magistrate. _Eh bien___, do you notice
anything else?”

I was forced to shake my head.

“Look at his hands.”

I did. The nails were broken and discoloured, and the skin was hard. It
hardly enlightened me as much as I should have liked it to have done. I
looked up at Giraud.

“They are not the hands of a gentleman,” he said, answering my look.
“On the contrary his clothes are those of a well-to-do man. That is
curious, is it not?”

“Very curious,” I agreed.

“And none of his clothing is marked. What do we learn from that? This
man was trying to pass himself off as other than he was. He was
masquerading. Why? Did he fear something? Was he trying to escape by
disguising himself? As yet we do not know, but one thing we do know—he
was as anxious to conceal his identity as we are to discover it.”

He looked down at the body again.

“As before there are no finger-prints on the handle of the dagger. The
murderer again wore gloves.”

“You think, then, that the murderer was the same in both cases?” I
asked eagerly.

Giraud became inscrutable.

“Never mind what I think. We shall see. Marchaud!”

The _sergent de ville___ appeared at the doorway.

“Monsieur?”

“Why is Madame Renauld not here? I sent for her a quarter of an hour
ago?”

“She is coming up the path now, monsieur, and her son with her.”

“Good. I only want one at a time, though.”

Marchaud saluted and disappeared again. A moment later he reappeared
with Mrs. Renauld.

“Here is Madame.”

Giraud came forward with a curt bow.

“This way, madame.” He led her across, and then, standing suddenly
aside. “Here is the man. Do you know him?”

And as he spoke, his eyes, gimlet-like, bored into her face, seeking to
read her mind, noting every indication of her manner.

But Mrs. Renauld remained perfectly calm—too calm, I felt. She looked
down at the corpse almost without interest, certainly without any sign
of agitation or recognition.

“No,” she said. “I have never seen him in my life. He is quite a
stranger to me.”

“You are sure?”

“Quite sure.”

“You do not recognize in him one of your assailants, for instance?”

“No,” she seemed to hesitate, as though struck by the idea. “No, I do
not think so. Of course they wore beards—false ones the examining
magistrate thought, but still—no.” Now she seemed to make her mind up
definitely. “I am sure neither of the two was this man.”

“Very well, madame. That is all, then.”

She stepped out with head erect, the sun flashing on the silver threads
in her hair. Jack Renauld succeeded her. He, too, failed to identify
the man, in a completely natural manner.

Giraud merely grunted. Whether he was pleased or chagrined I could not
tell. He merely called to Marchaud:

“You have got the other there?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Bring her in then.”

“The other” was Madame Daubreuil. She came indignantly, protesting with
vehemence.

“I object, monsieur! This is an outrage! What have I to do with all
this?”

“Madame,” said Giraud brutally, “I am investigating not one murder, but
two murders! For all I know you may have committed them both.”

“How dare you?” she cried. “How dare you insult me by such a wild
accusation! It is infamous.”

“Infamous, is it? What about this?” Stooping, he again detached the
hair, and held it up. “Do you see this, madame?” He advanced towards
her. “You permit that I see whether it matches?”

With a cry she started backwards, white to the lips.

“It is false—I swear it. I know nothing of the crime—of either crime.
Any one who says I do lies! Ah! _mon Dieu___, what shall I do?”

“Calm yourself, madame,” said Giraud coldly. “No one has accused you as
yet. But you will do well to answer my questions without more ado.”

“Anything you wish, monsieur.”

“Look at the dead man. Have you ever seen him before?”

Drawing nearer, a little of the colour creeping back to her face,
Madame Daubreuil looked down at the victim with a certain amount of
interest and curiosity. Then she shook her head.

“I do not know him.”

It seemed impossible to doubt her, the words came so naturally. Giraud
dismissed her with a nod of the head. “You are letting her go?” I asked
in a low voice. “Is that wise? Surely that black hair is from her
head.”

“I do not need teaching my business,” said Giraud dryly. “She is under
surveillance. I have no wish to arrest her as yet.”

Then, frowning, he gazed down at the body.

“Should you say that was a Spanish type at all?” he asked suddenly.

I considered the face carefully.

“No,” I said at last. “I should put him down as a Frenchman most
decidedly.”

Giraud gave a grunt of dissatisfaction.

“Same here.”

He stood there for a moment, then with an imperative gesture he waved
me aside, and once more, on hands and knees, he continued his search of
the floor of the shed. He was marvellous. Nothing escaped him. Inch by
inch he went over the floor, turning over pots, examining old sacks. He
pounced on a bundle by the door, but it proved to be only a ragged coat
and trousers, and he flung it down again with a snarl. Two pairs of old
gloves interested him, but in the end he shook his head and laid them
aside. Then he went back to the pots, methodically turning them over
one by one. In the end, he rose to his feet, and shook his head
thoughtfully. He seemed baffled and perplexed. I think he had forgotten
my presence.

But, at that moment, a stir and bustle was heard outside, and our old
friend, the examining magistrate, accompanied by his clerk and M. Bex,
with the doctor behind him, came bustling in.

“But this is extraordinary, Mr. Giraud,” cried M. Hautet. “Another
crime! Ah, we have not got to the bottom of this case. There is some
deep mystery here. But who is the victim this time?”

“That is just what nobody can tell us, M. le juge. He has not been
identified.”

“Where is the body?” asked the doctor.

Giraud moved aside a little.

“There in the corner. He has been stabbed to the heart, as you see. And
with the dagger that was stolen yesterday morning. I fancy that the
murder followed hard upon the theft—but that is for you to say. You can
handle the dagger freely—there are no finger-prints on it.”

The doctor knelt down by the dead man, and Giraud turned to the
examining magistrate.

“A pretty little problem, is it not? But I shall solve it.”

“And so no one can identify him,” mused the magistrate. “Could it
possibly be one of the assassins? They may have fallen out among
themselves.”

Giraud shook his head.

“The man is a Frenchman—I would take my oath of that—”

But at that moment they were interrupted by the doctor who was sitting
back on his heels with a perplexed expression.

“You say he was killed yesterday morning?”

“I fix it by the theft of the dagger,” explained Giraud. “He may, of
course, have been killed later in the day.”

“Later in the day? Fiddlesticks! This man has been dead at least
forty-eight hours, and probably longer.”

We stared at each other in blank amazement.




15 A Photograph

The doctor’s words were so surprising that we were all momentarily
taken aback. Here was a man stabbed with a dagger which we knew to have
been stolen only twenty-four hours previously, and yet Dr. Durand
asserted positively that he had been dead at least forty-eight hours!
The whole thing was fantastic to the last extreme.

We were still recovering from the surprise of the doctor’s
announcement, when a telegram was brought to me. It had been sent up
from the hotel to the Villa. I tore it open. It was from Poirot, and
announced his return by the train arriving at Merlinville at 12:28.

I looked at my watch and saw that I had just time to get comfortably to
the station and meet him there. I felt that it was of the utmost
importance that he should know at once of the new and startling
developments in the case.

Evidently, I reflected, Poirot had had no difficulty in finding what he
wanted in Paris. The quickness of his return proved that. Very few
hours had sufficed. I wondered how he would take the exciting news I
had to impart.

The train was some minutes late, and I strolled aimlessly up and down
the platform, until it occurred to me that I might pass the time by
asking a few questions as to who had left Merlinville by the last train
on the evening of the tragedy.

I approached the chief porter, an intelligent looking man, and had
little difficulty in persuading him to enter upon the subject. It was a
disgrace to the Police, he hotly affirmed, that such brigands of
assassins should be allowed to go about unpunished. I hinted that there
was some possibility they might have left by the midnight train, but he
negatived the idea decidedly. He would have noticed two foreigners—he
was sure of it. Only about twenty people had left by the train, and he
could not have failed to observe them.

I do not know what put the idea into my head—possibly it was the deep
anxiety underlying Marthe Daubreuil’s tones—but I asked suddenly:

“Young M. Renauld—he did not leave by that train, did he?”

“Ah, no, monsieur. To arrive and start off again within half an hour,
it would not be amusing, that!”

I stared at the man, the significance of his words almost escaping me.
Then I saw.…

“You mean,” I said, my heart beating a little, “that M. Jack Renauld
arrived at Merlinville that evening?”

“But yes, monsieur. By the last train arriving the other way, the
11:40.”

My brain whirled. That, then, was the reason of Marthe’s poignant
anxiety. Jack Renauld had been in Merlinville on the night of the
crime! But why had he not said so? Why, on the contrary, had he led us
to believe that he had remained in Cherbourg? Remembering his frank
boyish countenance, I could hardly bring myself to believe that he had
any connection with the crime. Yet why this silence on his part about
so vital a matter? One thing was certain, Marthe had known all along.
Hence her anxiety, and her eager questioning of Poirot to know whether
any one were suspected.

My cogitations were interrupted by the arrival of the train, and in
another moment I was greeting Poirot. The little man was radiant. He
beamed and vociferated and, forgetting my English reluctance, embraced
me warmly on the platform.

“_Mon cher ami___, I have succeeded—but succeeded to a marvel!”

“Indeed? I’m delighted to hear it. Have you heard the latest here?”

“How would you that I should hear anything? There have been some
developments, eh? The brave Giraud, he has made an arrest? Or even
arrests perhaps? Ah, but I will make him look foolish, that one! But
where are you taking me, my friend? Do we not go to the hotel? It is
necessary that I attend to my moustaches—they are deplorably limp from
the heat of travelling. Also, without doubt, there is dust on my coat.
And my tie, that I must rearrange.”

I cut short his remonstrances.

“My dear Poirot—never mind all that. We must go to the Villa at once.
_There has been another murder!___”

I have frequently been disappointed when fancying that I was giving
news of importance to my friend. Either he has known it already or he
has dismissed it as irrelevant to the main issue—and in the latter case
events have usually proved him justified. But this time I could not
complain of missing my effect. Never have I seen a man so
flabbergasted. His jaw dropped. All the jauntiness went out of his
bearing. He stared at me open-mouthed.

“What is that you say? Another murder? Ah, then, I am all wrong. I have
failed. Giraud may mock himself at me—he will have reason!”

“You did not expect it, then?”

“I? Not the least in the world. It demolishes my theory—it ruins
everything—it—ah, no!” He stopped dead, thumping himself on the chest.
“It is impossible. I _cannot___ be wrong! The facts, taken methodically
and in their proper order admit of only one explanation. I must be
right! I _am___ right!”

“But then—”

He interrupted me.

“Wait, my friend. I must be right, therefore this new murder is
impossible unless—unless—oh, wait, I implore you. Say no word—”

He was silent for a moment or two, then, resuming his normal manner, he
said in a quiet assured voice: “The victim is a man of middle-age. His
body was found in the locked shed near the scene of the crime and had
been dead at least forty-eight hours. And it is most probable that he
was stabbed in a similar manner to M. Renauld, though not necessarily
in the back.”

It was my turn to gape—and gape I did. In all my knowledge of Poirot he
had never done anything so amazing as this. And, almost inevitably, a
doubt crossed my mind.

“Poirot,” I cried, “you’re pulling my leg. You’ve heard all about it
already.”

He turned his earnest gaze upon me reproachfully.

“Would I do such a thing? I assure you that I have heard nothing
whatsoever. Did you not observe the shock your news was to me?”

“But how on earth could you know all that?”

“I was right then? But I knew it. The little grey cells, my friend, the
little grey cells! They told me. Thus, and in no other way, could there
have been a second death. Now tell me all. If we go round to the left
here, we can take a short cut across the golf links which will bring us
to the back of the Villa Geneviève much more quickly.”

As we walked, taking the way he had indicated, I recounted all I knew.
Poirot listened attentively.

“The dagger was in the wound, you say? That is curious. You are sure it
was the same one?”

“Absolutely certain. That’s what make it so impossible.”

“Nothing is impossible. There may have been two daggers.”

I raised my eyebrows.

“Surely that is in the highest degree unlikely? It would be a most
extraordinary coincidence.”

“You speak as usual, without reflection, Hastings. In some cases two
identical weapons _would___ be highly improbable. But not here. This
particular weapon was a war souvenir which was made to Jack Renauld’s
orders. It is really highly unlikely, when you come to think of it,
that he should have had only one made. Very probably he would have
another for his own use.”

“But nobody has mentioned such a thing,” I objected.

A hint of the lecturer crept into Poirot’s tone. “My friend, in working
upon a case, one does not take into account only the things that are
‘mentioned.’ There is no reason to mention many things which may be
important. Equally, there is often an excellent reason for _not___
mentioning them. You can take your choice of the two motives.”

I was silent, impressed in spite of myself. Another few minutes brought
us to the famous shed. We found all our friends there and, after an
interchange of polite amenities, Poirot began his task.

Having watched Giraud at work, I was keenly interested. Poirot bestowed
but a cursory glance on the surroundings. The only thing he examined
was the ragged coat and trousers by the door. A disdainful smile rose
to Giraud’s lips, and, as though noting it, Poirot flung the bundle
down again.

“Old clothes of the gardener’s?” he queried.

“Exactly,” said Giraud.

Poirot knelt down by the body. His fingers were rapid but methodical.
He examined the texture of the clothes, and satisfied himself that
there were no marks on them. The boots he subjected to special care,
also the dirty and broken finger-nails. Whilst examining the latter he
threw a quick question at Giraud.

“You saw these?”

“Yes, I saw them,” replied the other. His face remained inscrutable.

Suddenly Poirot stiffened.

“Dr. Durand!”

“Yes?” The doctor came forward.

“There is foam on the lips. You observed it?”

“I didn’t notice it, I must admit.”

“But you observe it now?”

“Oh, certainly.”

Poirot again shot a question at Giraud.

“You noticed it without doubt?”

The other did not reply. Poirot proceeded. The dagger had been
withdrawn from the wound. It reposed in a glass jar by the side of the
body. Poirot examined it, then he studied the wound closely. When he
looked up, his eyes were excited, and shone with the green light I knew
so well.

“It is a strange wound, this! It has not bled. There is no stain on the
clothes. The blade of the dagger is slightly discoloured, that is all.
What do you think, M. le docteur?”

“I can only say that it is most abnormal.”

“It is not abnormal at all. It is most simple. The man was stabbed
_after he was dead___.” And, stilling the clamour of voices that arose
with a wave of his hand, Poirot turned to Giraud and added, “M. Giraud
agrees with me, do you not, monsieur?”

Whatever Giraud’s real belief, he accepted the position without moving
a muscle. Calmly and almost scornfully he replied:

“Certainly I agree.”

The murmur of surprise and interest broke out again.

“But what an idea!” cried M. Hautet. “To stab a man after he is dead!
Barbaric! Unheard of! Some unappeasable hate, perhaps.”

“No, M. le juge,” said Poirot. “I should fancy it was done quite
cold-bloodedly—to create an impression.”

“What impression?”

“The impression it nearly did create,” returned Poirot oracularly.

M. Bex had been thinking.

“How, then, was the man killed?”

“He was not killed. He died. He died, M. le juge, if I am not much
mistaken, of an epileptic fit!”

This statement of Poirot’s again aroused considerable excitement. Dr.
Durand knelt down again, and made a searching examination. At last he
rose to his feet.

“Well, M. le docteur?”

“M. Poirot, I am inclined to believe that you are correct in your
assertion. I was misled to begin with. The incontrovertible fact that
the man had been stabbed distracted my attention from any other
indications.”

Poirot was the hero of the hour. The examining magistrate was profuse
in compliments. Poirot responded gracefully, and then excused himself
on the pretext that neither he nor I had yet lunched, and that he
wished to repair the ravages of the journey. As we were about to leave
the shed, Giraud approached us.

“One more thing, M. Poirot,” he said, in his suave mocking voice. “We
found this coiled round the handle of the dagger. A woman’s hair.”

“Ah!” said Poirot. “A woman’s hair? What woman’s, I wonder?”

“I wonder also,” said Giraud. Then, with a bow, he left us.

“He was insistent, the good Giraud,” said Poirot thoughtfully, as we
walked towards the hotel. “I wonder in what direction he hopes to
mislead me? A woman’s hair—h’m!”

We lunched heartily, but I found Poirot somewhat distrait and
inattentive. Afterwards we went up to our sitting-room and there I
begged him to tell me something of his mysterious journey to Paris.

“Willingly, my friend. I went to Paris to find _this___.”

He took from his pocket a small faded newspaper cutting. It was the
reproduction of a woman’s photograph. He handed it to me. I uttered an
exclamation.

“You recognize it, my friend?”

I nodded. Although the photo obviously dated from very many years back,
and the hair was dressed in a different style, the likeness was
unmistakable.

“Madame Daubreuil!” I exclaimed.

Poirot shook his head with a smile.

“Not quite correct, my friend. She did not call herself by that name in
those days. That is a picture of the notorious Madame Beroldy!”

Madame Beroldy! In a flash the whole thing came back to me. The murder
trial that had evoked such world-wide interest.


_The Beroldy Case.___




16 The Beroldy Case

Some twenty years or so before the opening of the present story,
Monsieur Arnold Beroldy, a native of Lyons, arrived in Paris
accompanied by his pretty wife and their little daughter, a mere babe.
Monsieur Beroldy was a junior partner in a firm of wine merchants, a
stout middle-aged man, fond of the good things of life, devoted to his
charming wife, and altogether unremarkable in every way. The firm in
which Monsieur Beroldy was a partner was a small one, and although
doing well, it did not yield a large income to the junior partner. The
Beroldys had a small apartment and lived in a very modest fashion to
begin with.

But unremarkable though Monsieur Beroldy might be, his wife was
plentifully gilded with the brush of Romance. Young and good looking,
and gifted withal with a singular charm of manner, Madame Beroldy at
once created a stir in the quarter, especially when it began to be
whispered that some interesting mystery surrounded her birth. It was
rumoured that she was the illegitimate daughter of a Russian Grand
Duke. Others asserted that it was an Austrian Archduke, and that the
union was legal, though morganatic. But all stories agreed upon one
point, that Jeanne Beroldy was the centre of an interesting mystery.
Questioned by the curious, Madame Beroldy did not deny these rumours.
On the other hand she let it be clearly understood that, though her
“lips” were “sealed,” all these stories had a foundation in fact. To
intimate friends she unburdened herself further, spoke of political
intrigues, of “papers,” of obscure dangers that threatened her. There
was also much talk of Crown jewels that were to be sold secretly, with
herself acting as the go-between.

Amongst the friends and acquaintances of the Beroldys was a young
lawyer, Georges Conneau. It was soon evident that the fascinating
Jeanne had completely enslaved his heart. Madame Beroldy encouraged the
young man in a discreet fashion, but being always careful to affirm her
complete devotion to her middle-aged husband. Nevertheless, many
spiteful persons did not hesitate to declare that young Conneau was her
lover—and not the only one!

When the Beroldys had been in Paris about three months, another
personage came upon the scene. This was Mr. Hiram P. Trapp, a native of
the United States, and extremely wealthy. Introduced to the charming
and mysterious Madame Beroldy, he fell a prompt victim to her
fascinations. His admiration was obvious, though strictly respectful.

About this time, Madame Beroldy became more outspoken in her
confidences. To several friends, she declared herself greatly worried
on her husband’s behalf. She explained that he had been drawn into
several schemes of a political nature, and also referred to some
important papers that had been entrusted to him for safekeeping and
which concerned a “secret” of far reaching European importance. They
had been entrusted to his custody to throw pursuers off the track, but
Madame Beroldy was nervous, having recognized several important members
of the Revolutionary Circle in Paris.

On the 28th day of November, the blow fell. The woman who came daily to
clean and cook for the Beroldys was surprised to find the door of the
apartment standing wide open. Hearing faint moans issuing from the
bedroom, she went in. A terrible sight met her eyes. Madame Beroldy lay
on the floor, bound hand and foot, uttering feeble moans, having
managed to free her mouth from a gag. On the bed was Monsieur Beroldy,
lying in a pool of blood, with a knife driven through his heart.

Madame Beroldy’s story was clear enough. Suddenly awakened from sleep,
she had discerned two masked men bending over her. Stifling her cries,
they had bound and gagged her. They had then demanded of Monsieur
Beroldy the famous “secret.”

But the intrepid wine merchant refused point-blank to accede to their
request. Angered by his refusal, one of the men incontinently stabbed
him through the heart. With the dead man’s keys, they had opened the
safe in the corner, and had carried away with them a mass of papers.
Both men were heavily bearded, and had worn masks, but Madame Beroldy
declared positively that they were Russians.

The affair created an immense sensation. It was referred to variously
as “the Nihilist Atrocity,” “Revolutionaries in Paris,” and the
“Russian Mystery.” Time went on, and the mysterious bearded men were
never traced. And then, just as public interest was beginning to die
down, a startling development occurred. Madame Beroldy was arrested and
charged with the murder of her husband.

The trial, when it came on, aroused widespread interest. The youth and
beauty of the accused, and her mysterious history, were sufficient to
make of it a _cause célèbre___. People ranged themselves wildly for or
against the prisoner. But her partisans received several severe checks
to their enthusiasm. The romantic past of Madame Beroldy, her royal
blood, and the mysterious intrigues in which she had her being were
shown to be mere fantasies of the imagination.

It was proved beyond doubt that Jeanne Beroldy’s parents were a highly
respectable and prosaic couple, fruit merchants, who lived on the
outskirts of Lyons. The Russian Grand Duke, the court intrigues, and
the political schemes—all the stories current were traced back to—the
lady herself! From her brain had emanated these ingenious myths, and
she was proved to have raised a considerable sum of money from various
credulous persons by her fiction of the “Crown jewels”—the jewels in
question being found to be mere paste imitations. Remorselessly the
whole story of her life was laid bare. The motive for the murder was
found in Mr. Hiram P. Trapp. Mr. Trapp did his best, but relentlessly
and agilely cross-questioned he was forced to admit that he loved the
lady, and that, had she been free, he would have asked her to be his
wife. The fact that the relations between them were admittedly platonic
strengthened the case against the accused. Debarred from becoming his
mistress by the simple honourable nature of the man, Jeanne Beroldy had
conceived the monstrous project of ridding herself of her elderly
undistinguished husband, and becoming the wife of the rich American.

Throughout, Madame Beroldy confronted her accusers with complete sang
froid and self possession. Her story never varied. She continued to
declare strenuously that she was of royal birth, and that she had been
substituted for the daughter of the fruit seller at an early age.
Absurd and completely unsubstantiated as these statements were, a great
number of people believed implicitly in their truth.

But the prosecution was implacable. It denounced the masked “Russians”
as a myth, and asserted that the crime had been committed by Madame
Beroldy and her lover, Georges Conneau. A warrant was issued for the
arrest of the latter, but he had wisely disappeared. Evidence showed
that the bonds which secured Madame Beroldy were so loose that she
could easily have freed herself.

And then, towards the close of the trial, a letter, posted in Paris,
was sent to the Public Prosecutor. It was from Georges Conneau and,
without revealing his whereabouts, it contained a full confession of
the crime. He declared that he had indeed struck the fatal blow at
Madame Beroldy’s instigation. The crime had been planned between them.
Believing that her husband ill-treated her, and maddened by his own
passion for her, a passion which he believed her to return, he had
planned the crime and struck the fatal blow that should free the woman
he loved from a hateful bondage. Now, for the first time, he learnt of
Mr. Hiram P. Trapp, and realized that the woman he loved had betrayed
him! Not for his sake did she wish to be free—but in order to marry the
wealthy American. She had used him as a cat’s-paw, and now, in his
jealous rage, he turned and denounced her, declaring that throughout he
had acted at her instigation.

And then Madame Beroldy proved herself the remarkable woman she
undoubtedly was. Without hesitation, she dropped her previous defence,
and admitted that the “Russians” were a pure invention on her part. The
real murderer was Georges Conneau. Maddened by passion, he had
committed the crime, vowing that if she did not keep silence he would
enact a terrible vengeance from her. Terrified by his threats, she had
consented—also fearing it likely that if she told the truth she might
be accused of conniving at the crime. But she had steadfastly refused
to have anything more to do with her husband’s murderer, and it was in
revenge for this attitude on her part that he had written this letter
accusing her. She swore solemnly that she had had nothing to do with
the planning of the crime, that she had awoke on that memorable night
to find Georges Conneau standing over her, the blood-stained knife in
his hand.

It was a touch and go affair. Madame Beroldy’s story was hardly
credible. But this woman, whose fairy tales of royal intrigues had been
so easily accepted, had the supreme art of making herself believed. Her
address to the jury was a masterpiece. The tears streaming down her
face, she spoke of her child, of her woman’s honour—of her desire to
keep her reputation untarnished for the child’s sake. She admitted
that, Georges Conneau having been her lover, she might perhaps be held
morally responsible for the crime—but, before God, nothing more! She
knew that she had committed a grave fault in not denouncing Conneau to
the law, but she declared in a broken voice that that was a thing no
woman could have done.… She had loved him! Could she let her hand be
the one to send him to the Guillotine? She had been guilty of much, but
she was innocent of the terrible crime imputed to her.

However that may have been, her eloquence and personality won the day.
Madame Beroldy, amidst a scene of unparalleled excitement, was
acquitted. Despite the utmost endeavours of the police, Georges Conneau
was never traced. As for Madame Beroldy, nothing more was heard of her.
Taking the child with her, she left Paris to begin a new life.




17 We Make Further Investigations

I have set down the Beroldy case in full. Of course all the details did
not present themselves to my memory as I have recounted them here.
Nevertheless, I recalled the case fairly accurately. It had attracted a
great deal of interest at the time, and had been fully reported by the
English papers, so that it did not need much effort of memory on my
part to recollect the salient details.

Just for the moment, in my excitement, it seemed to clear up the whole
matter. I admit that I am impulsive, and Poirot deplores my custom of
jumping to conclusions, but I think I had some excuse in this instance.
The remarkable way in which this discovery justified Poirot’s point of
view struck me at once.

“Poirot,” I said, “I congratulate you. I see everything now.”

“If that is indeed the truth, _I___ congratulate _you___, _mon ami___.
For as a rule you are not famous for seeing—eh, is it not so?”

I felt a little annoyed.

“Come now, don’t rub it in. You’ve been so confoundedly mysterious all
along with your hints and your insignificant details that any one might
fail to see what you were driving at.”

Poirot lit one of his little cigarettes with his usual precision. Then
he looked up.

“And since you see everything now, _mon ami___, what exactly is it that
you see?”

“Why, that it was Madame Daubreuil—Beroldy, who murdered Mr. Renauld.
The similarity of the two cases proves that beyond a doubt.”

“Then you consider that Madame Beroldy was wrongly acquitted? That in
actual fact she was guilty of connivance in her husband’s murder?”

I opened my eyes wide.

“But of course! Don’t you?”

Poirot walked to the end of the room, absentmindedly straightened a
chair, and then said thoughtfully.

“Yes, that is my opinion. But there is no ‘of course’ about it, my
friend. Technically speaking, Madame Beroldy is innocent.”

“Of that crime, perhaps. But not of this.”

Poirot sat down again, and regarded me, his thoughtful air more marked
than ever.

“So it is definitely your opinion, Hastings, that Madame Daubreuil
murdered M. Renauld?”

“Yes.”

“Why?”

He shot the question at me with such suddenness that I was taken aback.

“Why?” I stammered. “Why? Oh, because—” I came to a stop.

Poirot nodded his head at me.

“You see, you come to a stumbling-block at once. Why should Madame
Daubreuil (I shall call her that for clearness sake) murder M. Renauld?
We can find no shadow of a motive. She does not benefit by his death;
considered as either mistress or blackmailer she stands to lose. You
cannot have a murder without a motive. The first crime was different,
there we had a rich lover waiting to step into her husband’s shoes.”

“Money is not the only motive for murder,” I objected.

“True,” agreed Poirot placidly. “There are two others, the _crime
passionnel___ is one. And there is the third rare motive, murder for an
idea which implies some form of mental derangement on the part of the
murderer. Homicidal mania, and religious fanaticism belong to that
class. We can rule it out here.”

“But what about the _crime passionnel?___ Can you rule that out? If
Madame Daubreuil was Renauld’s mistress, if she found that his
affection was cooling, or if her jealousy was aroused in any way, might
she not have struck him down in a moment of anger?”

Poirot shook his head.

“If—I say _if___, you note—Madame Daubreuil was Renauld’s mistress, he
had not had time to tire of her. And in any case you mistake her
character. She is a woman who can simulate great emotional stress. She
is a magnificent actress. But, looked at dispassionately, her life
disproves her appearance. Throughout, if we examine it, she had been
cold-blooded and calculating in her motives and actions. It was not to
link her life with that of her young lover that she connived at her
husband’s murder. The rich American, for whom she probably did not care
a button, was her objective. If she committed a crime, she would always
do so for gain. Here there was no gain. Besides, how do you account for
the digging of the grave? That was a man’s work.”

“She might have had an accomplice,” I suggested, unwilling to
relinquish my belief.

“I pass to another objection. You have spoken of the similarity between
the two crimes. Wherein does that lie, my friend?”

I stared at him in astonishment.

“Why, Poirot, it was you who remarked on that! The story of the masked
men, the ‘secret,’ the papers!”

Poirot smiled a little.

“Do not be so indignant, I beg of you. I repudiate nothing. The
similarity of the two stories links the two cases together inevitably.
But reflect now on something very curious. It is not Madame Daubreuil
who tells us this tale—if it were all would indeed be plain sailing—it
is Madame Renauld. Is she then in league with the other?”

“I can’t believe that,” I said slowly. “If it is so, she must be the
most consummate actress the world has ever known.”

“Ta-ta-ta,” said Poirot impatiently. “Again you have the sentiment, and
not the logic! If it is necessary for a criminal to be a consummate
actress, then by all means assume her to be one. But is it necessary? I
do not believe Madame Renauld to be in league with Madame Daubreuil for
several reasons, some of which I have already enumerated to you. The
others are self-evident. Therefore, that possibility eliminated, we
draw very near to the truth which is, as always, very curious and
interesting.”

“Poirot,” I cried, “what more do you know?”

“_Mon ami___, you must make your own deductions. You have ‘access to
the facts!’ Concentrate your grey cells. Reason—not like Giraud—but
like Hercule Poirot.”

“But are you _sure?___”

“My friend, in many ways I have been an imbecile. But at last I see
clearly.”

“You know everything?”

“I have discovered what M. Renauld sent for me to discover.”

“And you know the murderer?”

“I know one murderer.”

“What do you mean?”

“We talk a little at cross-purposes. There are here not one crime, but
two. The first I have solved, the second—_eh bien___, I will confess, I
am not sure!”

“But, Poirot, I thought you said the man in the shed had died a natural
death?”

“Ta-ta-ta.” Poirot made his favourite ejaculation of impatience. “Still
you do not understand. One may have a crime without a murderer, but for
two crimes it is essential to have two bodies.”

His remark struck me as so peculiarly lacking in lucidity that I looked
at him in some anxiety. But he appeared perfectly normal. Suddenly he
rose and strolled to the window.

“Here he is,” he observed.

“Who?”

“M. Jack Renauld. I sent a note up to the Villa to ask him to come
here.”

That changed the course of my ideas, and I asked Poirot if he knew that
Jack Renauld had been in Merlinville on the night of the crime. I had
hoped to catch my astute little friend napping, but as usual, he was
omniscient. He, too, had inquired at the station.

“And without doubt we are not original in the idea, Hastings. The
excellent Giraud, he also has probably made his inquiries.”

“You don’t think—” I said, and then stopped. “Ah, no, it would be too
horrible!”

Poirot looked inquiringly at me, but I said no more. It had just
occurred to me that though there were seven women directly or
indirectly connected with the case Mrs. Renauld, Madame Daubreuil and
her daughter, the mysterious visitor, and the three servants—there was,
with the exception of old Auguste who could hardly count, only one
man—Jack Renauld. _And a man must have dug a grave.…___

I had no time to develop further the appalling idea that had occurred
to me, for Jack Renauld was ushered into the room.

Poirot greeted him in a business-like manner.

“Take a seat, monsieur. I regret infinitely to derange you, but you
will perhaps understand that the atmosphere of the Villa is not too
congenial to me. M. Giraud and I do not see eye to eye about
everything. His politeness to me has not been striking and you will
comprehend that I do not intend any little discoveries I may make to
benefit him in any way.”

“Exactly, M. Poirot,” said the lad. “That fellow Giraud is an
ill-conditioned brute, and I’d be delighted to see some one score at
his expense.”

“Then I may ask a little favour of you?”

“Certainly.”

“I will ask you to go to the railway station and take a train to the
next station along the line, Abbalac. Ask there at the cloak-room
whether two foreigners deposited a valise there on the night of the
murder. It is a small station, and they are almost certain to remember.
Will you do this?”

“Of course I will,” said the boy, mystified, though ready for the task.

“I and my friend, you comprehend, have business elsewhere,” explained
Poirot. “There is a train in a quarter of an hour, and I will ask you
not to return to the Villa, as I have no wish for Giraud to get an
inkling of your errand.”

“Very well, I will go straight to the station.”

He rose to his feet. Poirot’s voice stopped him.

“One moment, M. Renauld, there is one little matter that puzzles me.
Why did you not mention to M. Hautet this morning that you were in
Merlinville on the night of the crime?”

Jack Renauld’s face went crimson. With an effort he controlled himself.

“You have made a mistake. I was in Cherbourg, as I told the examining
magistrate this morning.”

Poirot looked at him, his eyes narrowed, cat-like, until they only
showed a gleam of green.

“Then it is a singular mistake that I have made there—for it is shared
by the station staff. They say you arrived by the 11:40 train.”

For a moment Jack Renauld hesitated, then he made up his mind.

“And if I did? I suppose you do not mean to accuse me of participating
in my father’s murder?” He asked the question haughtily, his head
thrown back.

“I should like an explanation of the reason that brought you here.”

“That is simple enough. I came to see my fiancée, Mademoiselle
Daubreuil. I was on the eve of a long voyage, uncertain as to when I
should return. I wished to see her before I went, to assure her of my
unchanging devotion.”

“And you did see her?” Poirot’s eyes never left the other’s face.

There was an appreciable pause before Renauld replied. Then he said:

“Yes.”

“And afterwards?”

“I found I had missed the last train. I walked to St. Beauvais where I
knocked up a garage and got a car to take me back to Cherbourg.”

“St. Beauvais? That is fifteen kilometres. A long walk, M. Renauld.”

“I—I felt like walking.”

Poirot bowed his head as a sign that he accepted the explanation. Jack
Renauld took up his hat and cane and departed. In a trice Poirot jumped
to his feet.

“Quick, Hastings. We will go after him.”

Keeping a discreet distance behind our quarry, we followed him through
the streets of Merlinville. But when Poirot saw that he took the
turning to the station, he checked himself.

“All is well. He has taken the bait. He will go to Abbalac, and will
inquire for the mythical valise left by the mythical foreigners. Yes,
_mon ami___, all that was a little invention of my own.”

“You wanted him out of the way!” I exclaimed.

“Your penetration is amazing, Hastings! Now, if you please, we will go
up to the Villa Geneviève.”




18 Giraud Acts

“By the way, Poirot,” I said, as we walked along the hot white road,
“I’ve got a bone to pick with you. I dare say you meant well, but
really it was no business of yours to go mouching round to the Hôtel du
Phare without letting me know.”

Poirot shot a quick sidelong glance at me.

“And how did you know I had been there?” he inquired.

Much to my annoyance I felt the colour rising in my cheeks.

“I happened to look in in passing,” I explained with as much dignity as
I could muster.

I rather feared Poirot’s banter, but to my relief, and somewhat to my
surprise, he only shook his head with a rather unusual gravity.

“If I have offended your susceptibilities in any way, I demand pardon
of you. You will understand better soon. But, believe me, I have
striven to concentrate all my energies on the case.”

“Oh, it’s all right,” I said, mollified by the apology. “I know it’s
only that you have my interests at heart. But I can take care of myself
all right.”

Poirot seemed to be about to say something further, but checked
himself.

Arrived at the Villa, Poirot led the way up to the shed where the
second body had been discovered. He did not, however, go in, but paused
by the bench which I have mentioned before as being set some few yards
away from it. After contemplating it for a moment or two, he paced
carefully from it to the hedge which marked the boundary between the
Villa Geneviève and the Villa Marguerite. Then he paced back again,
nodding his head as he did so. Returning again to the hedge, he parted
the bushes with his hands.

“With good fortune,” he remarked to me over his shoulder, “Mademoiselle
Marthe may find herself in the garden. I desire to speak to her and
would prefer not to call formally at the Villa Marguerite. Ah, all is
well, there she is. Pst, mademoiselle! Pst! _Un moment, s’il vous
plaît.___”

I joined him at the moment that Marthe Daubreuil, looking slightly
startled, came running up to the hedge at his call.

“A little word with you, mademoiselle, if it is permitted?”

“Certainly, Monsieur Poirot.”

Despite her acquiescence, her eyes looked troubled and afraid.

“Mademoiselle, do you remember running after me on the road the day
that I came to your house with the examining magistrate? You asked me
if any one were suspected of the crime.”

“And you told me two Chilians.” Her voice sounded rather breathless,
and her left hand stole to her breast.

“Will you ask me the same question again, mademoiselle?”

“What do you mean?”

“This. If you were to ask me that question again, I should give you a
different answer. Some one is suspected—but not a Chilian.”

“Who?” The word came faintly between her parted lips.

“M. Jack Renauld.”

“What?” It was a cry. “Jack? Impossible. Who dares to suspect him?”

“Giraud.”

“Giraud!” The girl’s face was ashy. “I am afraid of that man. He is
cruel. He will—he will—” She broke off. There was courage gathering in
her face, and determination. I realized in that moment that she was a
fighter. Poirot, too, watched her intently.

“You know, of course, that he was here on the night of the murder?” he
asked.

“Yes,” she replied mechanically. “He told me.”

“It was unwise to have tried to conceal the fact,” ventured Poirot.

“Yes, yes,” she replied impatiently. “But we cannot waste time on
regrets. We must find something to save him. He is innocent, of course,
but that will not help him with a man like Giraud who has his
reputation to think of. He must arrest some one, and that some one will
be Jack.”

“The facts will tell against him,” said Poirot. “You realize that?”

She faced him squarely, and used the words I had heard her say in her
mother’s drawing-room.

“I am not a child, monsieur. I can be brave and look facts in the face.
He is innocent, and we must save him.”

She spoke with a kind of desperate energy, then was silent, frowning as
she thought.

“Mademoiselle,” said Poirot observing her keenly, “is there not
something that you are keeping back that you could tell us?”

She nodded perplexedly.

“Yes, there is something, but I hardly know whether you will believe
it—it seems so absurd.”

“At any rate, tell us, mademoiselle.”

“It is this. M. Giraud sent for me, as an afterthought, to see if I
could identify the man in there.” She signed with her head towards the
shed. “I could not. At least I could not at the moment. But since I
have been thinking—”

“Well?”

“It seems so queer, and yet I am almost sure. I will tell you. On the
morning of the day M. Renauld was murdered, I was walking in the garden
here, when I heard a sound of men’s voices quarrelling. I pushed aside
the bushes and looked through. One of the men was M. Renauld and the
other was a tramp, a dreadful looking creature in filthy rags. He was
alternately whining and threatening. I gathered he was asking for
money, but at that moment _maman___ called me from the house, and I had
to go. That is all, only—I am almost sure that the tramp and the dead
man in the shed are one and the same.”

Poirot uttered an exclamation.

“But why did you not say so at the time, mademoiselle?”

“Because at first it only struck me that the face was vaguely familiar
in some way. The man was differently dressed, and apparently belonged
to a superior station in life. But tell me, Monsieur Poirot, is it not
possible that this tramp might have attacked and killed M. Renauld, and
taken his clothes and money?”

“It is an idea, mademoiselle,” said Poirot slowly. “It leaves a lot
unexplained, but it is certainly an idea. I will think of it.”

A voice called from the house.

“_Maman___,” whispered Marthe, “I must go.” And she slipped away
through the trees.

“Come,” said Poirot, and taking my arm, turned in the direction of the
Villa.

“What do you really think?” I asked, in some curiosity. “Was that story
true, or did the girl make it up in order to divert suspicion from her
lover?”

“It is a curious tale,” said Poirot, “but I believe it to be the
absolute truth. Unwittingly, Mademoiselle Marthe told us the truth on
another point—and incidentally gave Jack Renauld the lie. Did you
notice his hesitation when I asked him if he saw Marthe Daubreuil on
the night of the crime? He paused and then said ‘Yes.’ I suspected that
he was lying. It was necessary for me to see Mademoiselle Marthe before
he could put her on her guard. Three little words gave me the
information I wanted. When I asked her if she knew that Jack Renauld
was here that night, she answered ‘He _told___ me.’ Now, Hastings, what
was Jack Renauld doing here on that eventful evening, and if he did not
see Mademoiselle Marthe whom did he see?”

“Surely, Poirot,” I cried, aghast, “you cannot believe that a boy like
that would murder his own father.”

“_Mon ami___,” said Poirot, “you continue to be of a sentimentality
unbelievable! I have seen mothers who murdered their little children
for the sake of the insurance money! After that, one can believe
anything.”

“And the motive?”

“Money of course. Remember that Jack Renauld thought that he would come
in to half his father’s fortune at the latter’s death.”

“But the tramp. Where does he come in?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Giraud would say that he was an accomplice—an apache who helped young
Renauld to commit the crime, and who was conveniently put out of the
way afterwards.”

“But the hair round the dagger? The woman’s hair?”

“Ah,” said Poirot, smiling broadly. “That is the cream of Giraud’s
little jest. According to him, it is not a woman’s hair at all.
Remember that the youths of today wear their hair brushed straight back
from the forehead with pomade or hairwash to make it lie flat.
Consequently some of the hairs are of considerable length.”

“And you believe that too?”

“No,” said Poirot with a curious smile. “For I know it to be the hair
of a woman—and more, which woman!”

“Madame Daubreuil,” I announced positively.

“Perhaps,” said Poirot, regarding me quizzically.

But I refused to allow myself to get annoyed.

“What are we going to do now?” I asked, as we entered the hall of the
Villa Geneviève.

“I wish to make a search amongst the effects of M. Jack Renauld. That
is why I had to get him out of the way for a few hours.”

“But will not Giraud have searched already?” I asked doubtfully.

“Of course. He builds a case, as a beaver builds a dam, with a
fatiguing industry. But he will not have looked for the things that I
am seeking—in all probability he would not have seen their importance
if they stared him in the face. Let us begin.”

Neatly and methodically, Poirot opened each drawer in turn, examined
the contents, and returned them exactly to their places. It was a
singularly dull and uninteresting proceeding. Poirot waded on through
collars, pajamas and socks. A purring noise outside drew me to the
window. Instantly I became galvanized into life.

“Poirot!” I cried. “A car has just driven up. Giraud is in it, and Jack
Renauld, and two gendarmes.”

“_Sacré tonnerre!___” growled Poirot. “That animal of a Giraud, could
he not wait? I shall not be able to replace the things in this last
drawer with the proper method. Let us be quick.”

Unceremoniously he tumbled out the things on the floor, mostly ties and
handkerchiefs. Suddenly with a cry of triumph Poirot pounced on
something, a small square cardboard, evidently a photograph. Thrusting
it into his pocket, he returned the things pell-mell to the drawer, and
seizing me by the arm dragged me out of the room and down the stairs.
In the hall stood Giraud, contemplating his prisoner.

“Good afternoon, M. Giraud,” said Poirot. “What have we here?”

Giraud nodded his head towards Jack.

“He was trying to make a getaway, but I was too sharp for him. He is
under arrest for the murder of his father, M. Paul Renauld.”

Poirot wheeled to confront the boy who leaned limply against the door,
his face ashy pale.

“What do you say to that, _jeune homme?___”

Jack Renauld stared at him stonily.

“Nothing,” he said.




19 I Use My Grey Cells

I was dumbfounded. Up to the last, I had not been able bring myself to
believe Jack Renauld guilty. I had expected a ringing proclamation of
his innocence when Poirot challenged him. But now, watching him as he
stood, white and limp against the wall, and hearing the damning
admission fall from his lips, I doubted no longer.

But Poirot had turned to Giraud.

“What are your grounds for arresting him?”

“Do you expect me to give them to you?”

“As a matter of courtesy, yes.”

Giraud looked at him doubtfully. He was torn between a desire to refuse
rudely and the pleasure of triumphing over his adversary.

“You think I have made a mistake, I suppose?” he sneered.

“It would not surprise me,” replied Poirot, with a soupçon of malice.

Giraud’s face took on a deeper tinge of red.

“_Eh bien___, come in here. You shall judge for yourself.” He flung
open the door of the _salon___, and we passed in, leaving Jack Renauld
in the care of the two other men.

“Now, M. Poirot,” said Giraud laying his hat on the table, and speaking
with the utmost sarcasm, “I will treat you to a little lecture on
detective work. I will show you how we moderns work.”

“_Bien!___” said Poirot, composing himself to listen. “I will show you
how admirably the Old Guard can listen,” and he leaned back and closed
his eyes, opening them for a moment to remark. “Do not fear that I
shall sleep. I will attend most carefully.”

“Of course,” began Giraud, “I soon saw through all that Chilian
tomfoolery. Two men were in it—but they were not mysterious foreigners!
All that was a blind.”

“Very creditable so far, my dear Giraud,” murmured Poirot. “Especially
after that clever trick of theirs with the match and cigarette end.”

Giraud glared, but continued:

“A man must have been connected with the case, in order to dig the
grave. There is no man who actually benefits by the crime, but there
was a man who thought he would benefit. I heard of Jack Renauld’s
quarrel with his father, and of the threats that he had used. The
motive was established. Now as to means. Jack Renauld was in
Merlinville that night. He concealed the fact—which turned suspicion
into certainty. Then we found a second victim—_stabbed with the same
dagger___. We know when that dagger was stolen. Captain Hastings here
can fix the time. Jack Renauld, arriving from Cherbourg, was the only
person who could have taken it. I have accounted for all the other
members of the household.”

Poirot interrupted:

“You are wrong. There is one other person who could have taken the
dagger.”

“You refer to M. Stonor? He arrived at the front door, in an automobile
which had brought him straight from Calais. Ah, believe me, I have
looked into everything. M. Jack Renauld arrived by train. An hour
elapsed between his arrival, and the moment he presented himself at the
house. Without doubt, he saw Captain Hastings and his companion leave
the shed, slipped in himself and took the dagger, stabbed his
accomplice in the shed—”

“Who was already dead!”

Giraud shrugged his shoulders.

“Possibly he did not observe that. He may have judged him to be
sleeping. Without doubt they had a rendezvous. In any case he knew this
apparent second murder would greatly complicate the case. It did.”

“But it could not deceive M. Giraud,” murmured Poirot.

“You mock yourself at me. But I will give you one last irrefutable
proof. Madame Renauld’s story was false—a fabrication from beginning to
end. We believe Madame Renauld to have loved her husband—_yet she lied
to shield his murderer___. For whom will a woman lie? Sometimes for
herself, usually for the man she loves, _always___ for her children.
That is the last—the irrefutable proof. You cannot get round it.”

Giraud paused, flushed and triumphant. Poirot regarded him steadily.

“That is my case,” said Giraud. “What have you to say to it?”

“Only that there is one thing you have failed to take into account.”

“What is that?”

“Jack Renauld was presumably acquainted with the planning out of the
golf course. He knew that the body would be discovered almost at once,
when they started to dig the bunker.”

Giraud laughed out loud.

“But it is idiotic what you say there! He wanted the body to be found!
Until it was found, he could not presume death, and would have been
unable to enter into his inheritance.”

I saw a quick flash of green in Poirot’s eyes as he rose to his feet.

“Then why bury it?” he asked softly. “Reflect, Giraud. Since it was to
Jack Renauld’s advantage that the body should be found without delay,
_why dig a grave at all?___”

Giraud did not reply. The question found him unprepared. He shrugged
his shoulders as though to intimate that it was of no importance.

Poirot moved towards the door. I followed him.

“There is one more thing that you have failed to take into account,” he
said over his shoulder.

“What is that?”

“The piece of lead piping,” said Poirot, and left the room.

Jack Renauld still stood in the hall, with a white dumb face, but as we
came out of the _salon___, he looked up sharply. At the same moment
there was the sound of a footfall on the staircase. Mrs. Renauld was
descending it. At the sight of her son, standing between the two
myrmidons of the law, she stopped as though petrified.

“Jack,” she faltered. “Jack, what is this?”

He looked up at her, his face set.

“They have arrested me, mother.”

“What?”

She uttered a piercing cry, and before any one could get to her swayed
and fell heavily. We both ran to her and lifted her up. In a minute
Poirot stood up again.

“She has cut her head badly, on the corner of the stairs. I fancy there
is a slight concussion also. If Giraud wants a statement from her, he
will have to wait. She will probably be unconscious for at least a
week.”

Denise and Françoise had run to their mistress, and leaving her in
their charge Poirot left the house. He walked with his head bent down,
frowning thoughtfully at the ground. For some time I did not speak, but
at last I ventured to put a question to him.

“Do you believe then, in spite of all appearances to the contrary, that
Jack Renauld may not be guilty?”

Poirot did not answer at once, but after a long wait he said gravely:

“I do not know, Hastings. There is just a chance of it. Of course
Giraud is all wrong—wrong from beginning to end. If Jack Renauld is
guilty, it is in spite of Giraud’s arguments, not _because___ of them.
And the gravest indictment against him is known only to me.”

“What is that?” I asked, impressed.

“If you would use your grey cells, and see the whole case clearly as I
do, you too would perceive it, my friend.”

This was what I called one of Poirot’s irritating answers. He went on,
without waiting for me to speak.

“Let us walk this way to the sea. We will sit on that little mound
there, overlooking the beach, and review the case. You shall know all
that I know, but I would prefer that you should come at the truth by
your own efforts—not by my leading you by the hand.”

We established ourselves on the grassy knoll as Poirot had suggested,
looking out to sea. From farther along the sand, the cries of the
bathers reached us faintly. The sea was of the palest blue, and the
halcyon calm reminded me of the day we had arrived at Merlinville, my
own good spirits, and Poirot’s suggestion that I was “fey.” What a long
time seemed to have elapsed since then. And in reality it was only
three days!

“Think, my friend,” said Poirot’s voice encouragingly. “Arrange your
ideas. Be methodical. Be orderly. There is the secret of success.”

I endeavoured to obey him, casting my mind back over all the details of
the case. And reluctantly it seemed to me that the only clear and
possible solution was that of Giraud—which Poirot despised. I reflected
anew. If there was daylight anywhere it was in the direction of Madame
Daubreuil. Giraud was ignorant of her connection with the Beroldy Case.
Poirot had declared the Beroldy Case to be all important. It was there
I must seek. I was on the right track now. And suddenly I started as an
idea of bewildering luminosity shot into my brain. Trembling I built up
my hypothesis.

“You have a little idea, I see, _mon ami!___ Capital. We progress.”

I sat up, and lit a pipe.

“Poirot,” I said, “it seems to me we have been strangely remiss. I say
we—although I dare say _I___ would be nearer the mark. But you must pay
the penalty of your determined secrecy. So I say again we have been
strangely remiss. There is some one we have forgotten.”

“And who is that?” inquired Poirot, with twinkling eyes.

“Georges Conneau!”




20 An Amazing Statement

The next moment Poirot embraced me warmly. “_Enfin!___ You have
arrived. And all by yourself. It is superb! Continue your reasoning.
You are right. Decidedly we have done wrong to forget Georges Conneau.”

I was so flattered by the little man’s approval that I could hardly
continue. But at last I collected my thoughts and went on.

“Georges Conneau disappeared twenty years ago, but we have no reason to
believe that he is dead.”

“_Aucunement___,” agreed Poirot. “Proceed.”

“Therefore we will assume that he is alive.”

“Exactly.”

“Or that he was alive until recently.”

“_De mieux en mieux!___”

“We will presume,” I continued, my enthusiasm rising, “that he has
fallen on evil days. He has become a criminal, an apache, a tramp—a
what you will. He chances to come to Merlinville. There he finds the
woman he has never ceased to love.”

“Eh eh! The sentimentality,” warned Poirot.

“Where one hates one also loves,” I quoted or misquoted. “At any rate
he finds her there, living under an assumed name. But she has a new
lover, the Englishman, Renauld. Georges Conneau, the memory of old
wrongs rising in him, quarrels with this Renauld. He lies in wait for
him as he comes to visit his mistress, and stabs him in the back. Then,
terrified at what he has done, he starts to dig a grave. I imagine it
likely that Madame Daubreuil comes out to look for her lover. She and
Conneau have a terrible scene. He drags her into the shed, and there
suddenly falls down in an epileptic fit. Now supposing Jack Renauld to
appear. Madame Daubreuil tells him all, points out to him the dreadful
consequences to her daughter if this scandal of the past is revived.
His father’s murderer is dead—let them do their best to hush it up.
Jack Renauld consents—goes to the house and has an interview with his
mother, winning her over to his point of view. Primed with the story
that Madame Daubreuil has suggested to him, she permits herself to be
gagged and bound. There, Poirot, what do you think of that?” I leaned
back, flushed with the pride of successful reconstruction.

Poirot looked at me thoughtfully.

“I think that you should write for the Kinema, _mon ami___,” he
remarked at last.

“You mean—?”

“It would make a good film, the story that you have recounted to me
there—but it bears no sort of resemblance to everyday life.”

“I admit that I haven’t gone into all the details, but—”

“You have gone further—you have ignored them magnificently. What about
the way the two men were dressed? Do you suggest that after stabbing
his victim, Conneau removed his suit of clothes, donned it himself, and
replaced the dagger?”

“I don’t see that that matters,” I objected rather huffily. “He may
have obtained clothes and money from Madame Daubreuil by threats
earlier in the day.”

“By threats—eh? You seriously advance that supposition?”

“Certainly. He could have threatened to reveal her identity to the
Renaulds, which would probably have put an end to all hopes of her
daughter’s marriage.”

“You are wrong, Hastings. He could not blackmail her, for she had the
whip hand. Georges Conneau, remember, is still wanted for murder. A
word from her and he is in danger of the guillotine.”

I was forced, rather reluctantly, to admit the truth of this.

“_Your___ theory,” I remarked acidly, “is doubtless correct as to all
the details?”

“My theory is the truth,” said Poirot quietly. “And the truth is
necessarily correct. In your theory you made a fundamental error. You
permitted your imagination to lead you astray with midnight
assignations and passionate love scenes. But in investigating crime we
must take our stand upon the commonplace. Shall I demonstrate my
methods to you?”

“Oh, by all means let us have a demonstration!”

Poirot sat very upright and began, wagging his forefinger emphatically
to emphasize his points.

“I will start as you started from the basic fact of Georges Conneau.
Now the story told by Madame Beroldy in court as to the ‘Russians’ was
admittedly a fabrication. If she was innocent of connivance in the
crime, it was concocted by her, and by her only as she stated. If, on
the other hand, she was not innocent, it might have been invented by
either her or Georges Conneau.

“Now in this case we are investigating, we meet the same tale. As I
pointed out to you, the facts render it very unlikely that Madame
Daubreuil inspired it. So we turn to the hypothesis that the story had
its origin in the brain of Georges Conneau. Very good. Georges Conneau,
therefore, planned the crime with Madame Renauld as his accomplice. She
is in the limelight, and behind her is a shadowy figure whose alias is
unknown to us.

“Now let us go carefully over the Renauld Case from the beginning,
setting down each significant point in its chronological order. You
have a notebook and pencil? Good. Now what is the earliest point to
note down?”

“The letter to you?”

“That was the first we knew of it, but it is not the proper beginning
of the case. The first point of any significance, I should say, is the
change that came over M. Renauld shortly after arriving in Merlinville,
and which is attested to by several witnesses. We have also to consider
his friendship with Madame Daubreuil, and the large sums of money paid
over to her. From thence we can come directly to the 23rd May.”

Poirot paused, cleared his throat, and signed to me to write.

“_23rd May.___ M. Renauld quarrels with his son over latter’s wish to
marry Marthe Daubreuil. Son leaves for Paris.

“_24th May.___ M. Renauld alters his will, leaving entire control of
his fortune in his wife’s hands.

“_7th June.___ Quarrel with tramp in garden, witnessed by Marthe
Daubreuil.

“Letter written to M. Hercule Poirot, imploring assistance.

“Telegram sent to Jack Renauld, bidding him proceed by the _Anzora___
to Buenos Ayres.

“Chauffeur, Masters, sent off on a holiday.

“Visit of a lady, that evening. As he is seeing her out, his words are
‘Yes, yes—but for God’s sake go now.…’”

Poirot paused.

“There, Hastings, take each of those facts one by one, consider them
carefully by themselves and in relation to the whole, and see if you do
not get new light on the matter.”

I endeavoured conscientiously to do as he had said. After a moment or
two, I said rather doubtfully:

“As to the first points, the question seems to be whether we adopt the
theory of blackmail, or of an infatuation for this woman.”

“Blackmail, decidedly. You heard what Stonor said as to his character
and habits.”

“Mrs. Renauld did not confirm his view,” I argued.

“We have already seen that Madame Renauld’s testimony cannot be relied
upon in any way. We must trust to Stonor on that point.”

“Still, if Renauld had an affair with a woman called Bella, there seems
no inherent improbability in his having another with Madame Daubreuil.”

“None whatever, I grant you, Hastings. But did he?”

“The letter, Poirot. You forget the letter.”

“No, I do not forget. But what makes you think that letter was written
to M. Renauld?”

“Why it was found in his pocket and—and—”

“And that is all!” cut in Poirot. “There was no mention of any name to
show to whom the letter was addressed. We assumed it was to the dead
man because it was in the pocket of his overcoat. Now, _mon ami___,
something about that overcoat struck me as unusual. I measured it, and
made the remark that he wore his overcoat very long. That remark should
have given you to think.”

“I thought you were just saying it for the sake of saying something,” I
confessed.

“Ah, _quelle idée!___ Later you observed me measuring the overcoat of
M. Jack Renauld. _Eh bien___, M. Jack Renauld wears his overcoat very
short. Put those two facts together with a third, namely that M. Jack
Renauld flung out of the house in a hurry on his departure for Paris,
and tell me what you make of it!”

“I see,” I said slowly, as the meaning of Poirot’s remarks bore in upon
me. “That letter was written to Jack Renauld—not to his father. He
caught up the wrong overcoat in his haste and agitation.”

Poirot nodded.

“_Précisement!___ We can return to this point later. For the moment let
us content ourselves with accepting the letter as having nothing to do
with M. Renauld _père___, and pass to the next chronological event.”

“May 23rd,” I read, “M. Renauld quarrels with his son over latter’s
wish to marry Marthe Daubreuil. Son leaves for Paris. I don’t see
anything much to remark upon there, and the altering of the will the
following day seems straightforward enough. It was the direct result of
the quarrel.”

“We agree, _mon ami___—at least as to the cause. But what exact motive
underlay this procedure of M. Renauld’s?”

I opened my eyes in surprise.

“Anger against his son of course.”

“Yet he wrote him affectionate letters to Paris?”

“So Jack Renauld says, but he cannot produce them.”

“Well, let us pass from that.”

“Now we come to the day of the tragedy. You have placed the events of
the morning in a certain order. Have you any justification for that?”

“I have ascertained that the letter to me was posted at the same time
as the telegram was despatched. Masters was informed he could take a
holiday shortly afterwards. In my opinion the quarrel with the tramp
took place anterior to these happenings.”

“I do not see that you can fix that definitely—unless you question
Mademoiselle Dabreuil again.”

“There is no need. I am sure of it. And if you do not see that, you see
nothing, Hastings!”

I looked at him for a moment.

“Of course! I am an idiot. If the tramp was Georges Conneau, it was
after the stormy interview with him that Mr. Renauld apprehended
danger. He sent away the chauffeur, Masters, whom he suspected of being
in the other’s pay, he wired to his son, and sent for you.”

A faint smile crossed Poirot’s lips.

“You do not think it strange that he should use exactly the same
expressions in his letter as Madame Renauld used later in her story? If
the mention of Santiago was a blind, why should Renauld speak of it,
and—what is more—send his son there?”

“It is puzzling, I admit, but perhaps we shall find some explanation
later. We come now to the evening, and the visit of the mysterious
lady. I confess that that fairly baffles me, unless it was Madame
Daubreuil, as Françoise all along maintained.”

Poirot shook his head.

“My friend, my friend, where are your wits wandering? Remember the
fragment of cheque, and the fact that the name Bella Duveen was faintly
familiar to Stonor, and I think we may take it for granted that Bella
Duveen is the full name of Jack’s unknown correspondent, and that it
was she who came to the Villa Geneviève that night. Whether she
intended to see Jack, or whether she meant all along to appeal to his
father we cannot be certain, but I think we may assume that this is
what occurred. She produced her claim upon Jack, probably showed
letters that he had written her, and the older man tried to buy her off
by writing a cheque. This she indignantly tore up. The terms of her
letter are those of a woman genuinely in love, and she would probably
deeply resent being offered money. In the end he got rid of her, and
here the words that he used are significant.”

“‘Yes, yes, but for God’s sake go now,’” I repeated. “They seem to me
a little vehement, perhaps, that is all.”

“That is enough. He was desperately anxious for the girl to go. Why?
Not only because the interview was unpleasant. No, it was the time that
was slipping by, and for some reason time was precious.”

“Why should it be?” I asked, bewildered.

“That is what we ask ourselves. Why should it be? But later we have the
incident of the wrist watch—which again shows us that time plays a very
important part in the crime. We are now fast approaching the actual
drama. It is half-past ten when Bella Duveen leaves, and by the
evidence of the wrist watch we know that the crime was committed, or at
any rate that it was staged, before twelve o’clock. We have reviewed
all the events anterior to the murder, there remains only one unplaced.
By the doctor’s evidence, the tramp, when found, had been dead at least
forty-eight hours—with a possible margin of twenty-four hours more.
Now, with no other facts to help me than those we have discussed, I
place the death as having occurred on the morning of June 7th.”

I stared at him, stupefied.

“But how? Why? How can you possibly know?”

“Because only in that way can the sequence of events be logically
explained. _Mon ami___, I have taken you step by step along the way. Do
you not now see what is so glaringly plain?”

“My dear Poirot, I can’t see anything glaring about it. I did think I
was beginning to see my way before, but I’m now hopelessly fogged.”

Poirot looked at me sadly, and shook his head. “_Mon Dieu!___ But it is
_triste!___ A good intelligence—and so deplorably lacking in method.
There is an exercise most excellent for the development of the little
grey cells. I will impart it to you—”

“For Heaven’s sake, not now! You really are the most irritating of
fellows, Poirot. For goodness’ sake, get on and tell me who killed M.
Renauld.”

“That is just what I am not sure of as yet.”

“But you said it was glaringly clear?”

“We talk at cross-purposes, my friend. Remember, it is two crimes we
are investigating—for which, as I pointed out to you, we have the
necessary two bodies. There, there, _ne vous impatientez pas!___ I
explain all. To begin with, we apply our psychology. We find three
points at which M. Renauld displays a distinct change of view and
action—three psychological points therefore. The first occurs
immediately after arriving in Merlinville, the second after quarrelling
with his son on a certain subject, the third on the morning of June
7th. Now for the three causes. We can attribute No. 1 to meeting Madame
Daubreuil. No. 2 is indirectly connected with her since it concerns a
marriage between M. Renauld’s son and her daughter. But the cause of
No. 3 is hidden from us. We have to deduce it. Now, _mon ami___, let me
ask you a question; who do we believe to have planned this crime?”

“Georges Conneau,” I said doubtfully, eyeing Poirot warily.

“Exactly. Now Giraud laid it down as an axiom that a woman lies to save
herself, the man she loves, and her child. Since we are satisfied that
was Georges Conneau who dictated the lie to her, and as Georges Conneau
is not Jack Renauld, follows that the third case is put out of court.
And, still attributing the crime to Georges Conneau, the first is
equally so. So we are forced to the second—that Madame Renauld lied for
the sake of the man she loved—or in other words, for the sake of
Georges Conneau. You agree to that.”

“Yes,” I admitted. “It seems logical enough.”

“_Bien!___ Madame Renauld loves Georges Conneau. Who, then, is Georges
Conneau?”

“The tramp.”

“Have we any evidence to show that Madame Renauld loved the tramp?”

“No, but—”

“Very well then. Do not cling to theories where facts no longer support
them. Ask yourself instead who Madame Renauld _did___ love.”

I shook my head perplexed.

“_Mais, oui___, you know perfectly. Who did Madame Renauld love so
dearly that when she saw his dead body, she fell down in a swoon?”

I stared dumbfounded.

“Her husband?” I gasped.

Poirot nodded.

“Her husband—or Georges Conneau, whichever you like to call him.”

I rallied myself.

“But it’s impossible.”

“How ‘impossible?’ Did we not agree just now that Madame Daubreuil was
in a position to blackmail Georges Conneau?”

“Yes, but—”

“And did she not very effectively blackmail M. Renauld?”

“That may be true enough, but—”

“And is it not a fact that we know nothing of M. Renauld’s youth and
upbringing? That he springs suddenly into existence as a French
Canadian exactly twenty-two years ago?”

“All that is so,” I said more firmly, “but you seem to me to be
overlooking one salient point.”

“What is it, my friend?”

“Why, we have admitted Georges Conneau planned the crime. That brings
us to the ridiculous statement that he planned his own murder!”

“_Eh bien, mon ami___,” said Poirot placidly, “that is just what he did
do!”




21 Hercule Poirot on the Case!

In a measured voice, Poirot began his exposition.

“It seems strange to you, _mon ami___, that a man should plan his own
death? So strange, that you prefer to reject the truth as fantastic,
and to revert to a story that is in reality ten times more impossible.
Yes, M. Renauld planned his own death, but there is one detail that
perhaps escapes you—he did not intend to die.”

I shook my head, bewildered.

“But no, it is all most simple really,” said Poirot kindly. “For the
crime that M. Renauld proposed a murderer was not necessary, as I told
you, but a body was. Let us reconstruct, seeing events this time from a
different angle.

“Georges Conneau flies from justice—to Canada. There, under an assumed
name he marries, and finally acquires a vast fortune in South America.
But there is a nostalgia upon him for his own country. Twenty years
have elapsed, he is considerably changed in appearance, besides being a
man of such eminence that no one is likely to connect him with a
fugitive from justice many years ago. He deems it quite safe to return.
He takes up his headquarters in England, but intends to spend the
summers in France. And ill fortune, that obscure justice which shapes
men’s ends, and will not allow them to evade the consequences of their
acts, takes him to Merlinville. There, in the whole of France, is the
one person who is capable of recognizing him. It is, of course, a gold
mine to Madame Daubreuil, and a gold mine of which she is not slow to
take advantage. He is helpless, absolutely in her power. And she bleeds
him heavily.

“And then the inevitable happens. Jack Renauld falls in love with the
beautiful girl he sees almost daily, and wishes to marry her. That
rouses his father. At all costs, he will prevent his son marrying the
daughter of this evil woman. Jack Renauld knows nothing of his father’s
past, but Madame Renauld knows everything. She is a woman of great
force of character, and passionately devoted to her husband. They take
counsel together. Renauld sees only one way of escape—death. He must
appear to die, in reality escaping to another country where he will
start again under an assumed name, and where Madame Renauld, having
played the widow’s part for a while, can join him. It is essential that
she should have control of the money, so he alters his will. How they
meant to manage the body business originally, I do not know—possibly an
art student’s skeleton—and a fire or something of the kind, but long
before their plans have matured an event occurs which plays into their
hands. A rough tramp, violent and abusive, finds his way into the
garden. There is a struggle, M. Renauld seeks to eject him, and
suddenly the tramp, an epileptic, falls down in a fit. He is dead. M.
Renauld calls his wife. Together they drag him into the shed—as we
know, the event had occurred just outside—and they realize the
marvellous opportunity that has been vouchsafed them. The man bears no
resemblance to M. Renauld, but he is middle-aged, of a usual French
type. That is sufficient.

“I rather fancy that they sat on the bench up there, out of earshot
from the house, discussing matters. Their plan was quickly made. The
identification must rest solely on Madame Renauld’s evidence. Jack
Renauld and the chauffeur (who had been with his master two years) must
be got out of the way. It was unlikely that the French women servants
would go near the body, and in any case Renauld intended to take
measures to deceive any one not likely to appreciate details. Masters
was sent off, a telegram despatched to Jack, Buenos Ayres being
selected to give credence to the story that Renauld had decided upon.
Having heard of me, as a rather obscure elderly detective, he wrote his
appeal for help knowing that, when I arrived, the production of the
letter would have a profound effect upon the examining
magistrate—which, of course, it did.

“They dressed the body of the tramp in a suit of M. Renauld’s and left
his ragged coat and trousers by the door of the shed, not daring to
take them into the house. And then, to give credence to the tale Madame
Renauld was to tell, they drove the aeroplane dagger through his heart.
That night, M. Renauld will first bind and gag his wife, and then,
taking a spade, will dig a grave in that particular spot of ground
where he knows a—how do you call it? bunkair?—is to be made. It is
essential that the body should be found—Madame Daubreuil must have no
suspicions. On the other hand, if a little time elapses, any dangers as
to identity will be greatly lessened. Then, M. Renauld will don the
tramp’s rags, and shuffle off to the station, where he will leave,
unnoticed, by the 12:10 train. Since the crime will be supposed to have
taken place two hours later, no suspicion can possibly attach to him.

“You see now his annoyance at the inopportune visit of the girl Bella.
Every moment of delay is fatal to his plans. He gets rid of her as soon
as he can, however. Then, to work! He leaves the front door slightly
ajar to create the impression that the assassins left that way. He
binds and gags Madame Renauld, correcting his mistake of twenty-two
years ago, when the looseness of the bonds caused suspicion to fall
upon his accomplice, but leaving her primed with essentially the same
story as he had invented before, proving the unconscious recoil of the
mind against originality. The night is chilly, and he slips on an
overcoat over his underclothing, intending to cast it into the grave
with the dead man. He goes out by the window, smoothing over the flower
bed carefully, and thereby furnishing the most positive evidence
against himself. He goes out on to the lonely golf links, and he
digs—and then—”

“Yes?”

“And then,” said Poirot gravely, “the justice that he has so long
eluded overtakes him. An unknown hand stabs him in the back.… Now,
Hastings, you understand what I mean when I talk of _two___ crimes. The
first crime, the crime that M. Renauld, in his arrogance, asked us to
investigate (ah, but he made a famous mistake there! He misjudged
Hercule Poirot!) is solved. But behind it lies a deeper riddle. And to
solve that will be difficult—since the criminal in his wisdom, has been
content to avail himself of the devices prepared by M. Renauld. It has
been a particularly perplexing and baffling mystery to solve. A young
hand, like Giraud, who does not place any reliance on the psychology,
is almost certain to fail.”

“You’re marvellous, Poirot,” I said, with admiration. “Absolutely
marvellous. No one on earth but you could have done it!”

I think my praise pleased him. For once in his life, he looked almost
embarrassed.

“Ah, then you no longer despise poor old Papa Poirot? You shift your
allegiance back from the human foxhound?”

His term for Giraud never failed to make me smile.

“Rather. You’ve scored over him handsomely.”

“That poor Giraud,” said Poirot, trying unsuccessfully to look modest.
“Without doubt it is not all stupidity. He has had _la mauvaise
chance___ once or twice. That dark hair coiled round the dagger, for
instance. To say the least, it was misleading.”

“To tell you the truth, Poirot,” I said slowly, “even now I don’t quite
see—whose hair was it?”

“Madame Renauld’s of course. That is where _la mauvaise chance___ came
in. Her hair, dark originally, is almost completely silvered. It might
just as easily have been a grey hair—and then, by no conceivable effort
could Giraud have persuaded himself it came from the head of Jack
Renauld! But it is all of a piece. Always the facts must be twisted to
fit the theory! Did not Giraud find the traces of two persons, a man
and a woman, in the shed? And how does that fit in with his
reconstruction of the case? I will tell you—it does not fit in, and so
we shall hear no more of them! I ask you, is that a methodical way of
working? The great Giraud! The great Giraud is nothing but a toy
balloon—swollen with its own importance. But I, Hercule Poirot, whom he
despises, will be the little pin that pricks the big balloon—_comme
ça!___” And he made an expressive gesture. Then, calming down, he
resumed:

“Without doubt, when Madame Renauld recovers, she will speak. The
possibility of her son being accused of the murder never occurred to
her. How should it, when she believed him safely at sea on board the
_Anzora?___ _Ah! voilà une femme___, Hastings! What force, what
self-command! She only made one slip. On his unexpected return: ‘It
does not matter—_now___.’ And no one noticed—no one realized the
significance of those words. What a terrible part she has had to play,
poor woman. Imagine the shock when she goes to identify the body and,
instead of what she expects, sees the actual lifeless form of the
husband she has believed miles away by now. No wonder she fainted! But
since then, despite her grief and her despair, how resolutely she has
played her part, and how the anguish of it must wring her. She cannot
say a word to set us on the track of the real murderers. For her son’s
sake, no one must know that Paul Renauld was Georges Conneau, the
criminal. Final and most bitter blow, she has admitted publicly that
Madame Daubreuil was her husband’s mistress—for a hint of blackmail
might be fatal to her secret. How cleverly she dealt with the examining
magistrate when he asked her if there was any mystery in her husband’s
past life. ‘Nothing so romantic, I am sure, M. le juge.’ It was
perfect, the indulgent tone, the _soupçon___ of sad mockery. At once M.
Hautet felt himself foolish and melodramatic. Yes, she is a great
woman! If she loved a criminal, she loved him royally!”

Poirot lost himself in contemplation.

“One thing more, Poirot, what about the piece of lead piping?”

“You do not see? To disfigure the victim’s face so that it would be
unrecognizable. It was that which first set me on the right track. And
that imbecile of a Giraud, swarming all over it to look for match ends!
Did I not tell you that a clue of two feet long was quite as good as a
clue of two inches?”

“Well, Giraud will sing small now,” I observed hastily, to lead the
conversation away from my own shortcomings.

“As I said before, will he? If he has arrived at the right person by
the wrong method, he will not permit that to worry him.”

“But surely—” I paused as I saw the new trend of things.

“You see, Hastings, we must now start again. Who killed M. Renauld?
Some one who was near the Villa just before twelve o’clock that night,
some one who would benefit by his death—the description fits Jack
Renauld only too well. The crime need not have been premeditated. And
then the dagger!”

I started, I had not realized that point.

“Of course,” I said. “The second dagger we found in the tramp was Mrs.
Renauld’s. There _were___ two, then.”

“Certainly, and, since they were duplicates, it stands to reason that
Jack Renauld was the owner. But that would not trouble me so much. In
fact I have a little idea as to that. No, the worst indictment against
him is again psychological—heredity, _mon ami___, heredity! Like
father, like son—Jack Renauld, when all is said or done, is the son of
Georges Conneau.”

His tone was grave and earnest, and I was impressed in spite of myself.

“What is your little idea that you mentioned just now?” I asked.

For answer, Poirot consulted his turnip-faced watch, and then asked:

“What time is the afternoon boat from Calais?”

“About five, I believe.”

“That will do very well. We shall just have time.”

“You are going to England?”

“Yes, my friend.”

“Why?”

“To find a possible—witness.”

“Who?”

With a rather peculiar smile upon his face, Poirot replied:

“Miss Bella Duveen.”

“But how will you find her—what do you know about her?”

“I know nothing about her—but I can guess a good deal. We may take it
for granted that her name _is___ Bella Duveen, and since that name was
faintly familiar to M. Stonor, though evidently not in connection with
the Renauld family, it is probable that she is on the stage. Jack
Renauld was a young man with plenty of money, and twenty years of age.
The stage is sure to have been the home of his first love. It tallies,
too, with M. Renauld’s attempt to placate her with a cheque. I think I
shall find her all right—especially with the help of _this___.”

And he brought out the photograph I had seen him take from Jack
Renauld’s drawer. “With love from Bella,” was scrawled across the
corner, but it was not that which held my eyes fascinated. The likeness
was not first rate—but for all that it was unmistakable to me. I felt a
cold sinking, as though some unutterable calamity had befallen me.

It was the face of Cinderella.




22 I Find Love

For a moment or two I sat as though frozen, the photograph still in my
hand. Then, summoning all my courage to appear unmoved, I handed it
back. At the same time, I stole a quick glance at Poirot. Had he
noticed anything? But to my relief he did not seem to be observing me.
Anything unusual in my manner had certainly escaped him.

He rose briskly to his feet.

“We have no time to lose. We must make our departure with all despatch.
All is well—the sea it will be calm!”

In the bustle of departure, I had no time for thinking, but once on
board the boat, secure from Poirot’s observation (he, as usual, was
“practising the method most excellent of Laverguier”) I pulled myself
together, and attacked the facts dispassionately. How much did Poirot
know? Was he aware that my acquaintance of the train and Bella Duveen
were one and the same? Why had he gone to the Hôtel du Phare? On my
behalf as I had believed? Or had I only fatuously thought so, and was
this visit undertaken with a deeper and more sinister purpose?

But in any case, why was he bent on finding this girl? Did he suspect
her of having seen Jack Renauld commit the crime? Or did he suspect—but
that was impossible! The girl had no grudge against the elder Renauld,
no possible motive for wishing his death. What had brought her back to
the scene of the murder? I went over the facts carefully. She must have
left the train at Calais where I parted from her that day. No wonder I
had been unable to find her on the boat. If she had dined in Calais,
and then taken a train out to Merlinville, she would have arrived at
the Villa Geneviève just about the time that Françoise said. What had
she done when she left the house just after ten? Presumably either gone
to an hotel, or returned to Calais. And then? The crime had been
committed on Tuesday night. On Thursday morning, she was once more in
Merlinville. Had she ever left France at all? I doubted it very much.
What kept her there—the hope of seeing Jack Renauld? I had told her (as
at the time we believed) that he was on the high seas _en route___ to
Buenos Ayres. Possibly she was aware that the _Anzora___ had not
sailed. But to know that she must have seen Jack. Was that what Poirot
was after? Had Jack Renauld, returning to see Marthe Daubreuil, come
face to face instead with Bella Duveen, the girl he had heartlessly
thrown over?

I began to see daylight. If that were indeed the case, it might furnish
Jack with the alibi he needed. Yet under those circumstances his
silence seemed difficult to explain. Why could he not have spoken out
boldly? Did he fear for this former entanglement of his to come to the
ears of Marthe Daubreuil? I shook my head, dissatisfied. The thing had
been harmless enough, a foolish boy and girl affair, and I reflected
cynically that the son of a millionaire was not likely to be thrown
over by a penniless French girl, who moreover loved him devotedly,
without a much graver cause.

Altogether I found the affair puzzling and unsatisfactory. I disliked
intensely being associated with Poirot in hunting this girl down, but I
could not see any way of avoiding it, without revealing everything to
him, and this, for some reason, I was loath to do.

Poirot reappeared brisk and smiling at Dover, and our journey to London
was uneventful. It was past nine o’clock when we arrived, and I
supposed that we should return straight away to our rooms and do
nothing till the morning. But Poirot had other plans.

“We must lose no time, _mon ami___. The news of the arrest will not be
in the English papers until the day after tomorrow, but still we must
lose no time.”

I did not quite follow his reasoning, but I merely asked how he
proposed to find the girl.

“You remember Joseph Aarons, the theatrical agent? No? I assisted him
in a little matter of a Japanese wrestler. A pretty little problem, I
must recount it to you one day. He, without doubt, will be able to put
us in the way of finding out what we want to know.”

It took us some time to run Mr. Aarons to earth, and it was after
midnight when we finally managed it. He greeted Poirot with every
evidence of warmth, and professed himself ready to be of service to us
in any way.

“There’s not much about the profession I don’t know,” he said, beaming
genially.

“_Eh bien___, M. Aarons, I desire to find a young girl called Bella
Duveen.”

“Bella Duveen. I know the name, but for the moment I can’t place it.
What’s her line?”

“That I do not know—but here is her photograph.”

Mr. Aarons studied it for a moment, then his face lighted.

“Got it!” He slapped his thigh. “The Dulcibella Kids, by the Lord!”

“The Dulcibella Kids?”

“That’s it. They’re sisters. Acrobats, dancers and singers. Give quite
a good little turn. They’re in the provinces somewhere, I believe—if
they’re not resting. They’ve been on in Paris for the last two or three
weeks.”

“Can you find out for me exactly where they are?”

“Easy as a bird. You go home, and I’ll send you round the dope in the
morning.”

With this promise we took leave of him. He was as good as his word.
About eleven o’clock the following day, a scribbled note reached us.

“The Dulcibella Sisters are on at the Palace in Coventry. Good luck to
you.”

Without more ado, we started for Coventry. Poirot made no inquiries at
the theatre, but contented himself with booking stalls for the variety
performance that evening.

The show was wearisome beyond words—or perhaps it was only my mood that
made it seem so. Japanese families balanced themselves precariously,
would-be fashionable men, in greenish evening dress and exquisitely
slicked hair, reeled off society patter and danced marvellously, stout
prima donnas sang at the top of the human register, a comic comedian
endeavoured to be Mr. George Robey and failed signally.

At last the number went up which announced the Dulcibella Kids. My
heart beat sickeningly. There she was—there they both were, the pair of
them, one flaxen haired, one dark, matching as to size, with short
fluffy skirts and immense buster brown bows. They looked a pair of
extremely piquant children. They began to sing. Their voices were fresh
and true, rather thin and music-hally, but attractive.

It was quite a pretty little turn. They danced neatly, and did some
clever little acrobatic feats. The words of their songs were crisp and
catchy. When the curtain fell, there was a full meed of applause.
Evidently the Dulcibella Kids were a success.

Suddenly I felt that I could remain no longer. I must get out into the
air. I suggested leaving to Poirot.

“Go by all means, _mon ami___. I amuse myself, and will stay to the
end. I will rejoin you later.”

It was only a few steps from the theatre to the hotel. I went up to the
sitting-room, ordered a whisky and soda, and sat drinking it, staring
meditatively into the empty grate. I heard the door open, and turned my
head, thinking it was Poirot. Then I jumped to my feet. It was
Cinderella who stood in the doorway. She spoke haltingly, her breath
coming in little gasps.

“I saw you in front. You and your friend. When you got up to go, I was
waiting outside and followed you. Why are you here—in Coventry? What
were you doing there to-night? Is the man who was with you the—the
detective?”

She stood there, the cloak she had wrapped round her stage dress
slipping from her shoulders. I saw the whiteness of her cheeks under
the rouge, and heard the terror in her voice. And in that moment I
understood everything—understood why Poirot was seeking her, and what
she feared, and understood at last my own heart.…

“Yes,” I said gently.

“Is he looking for—me?” she half whispered.

Then, as I did not answer for a moment, she slipped down by the big
chair, and burst into violent, bitter weeping.

I knelt down by her, holding her in my arms, and smoothing the hair
back from her face.

“Don’t cry, child, don’t cry, for God’s sake. You’re safe here. I’ll
take care of you. Don’t cry, darling. Don’t cry. I know—I know
everything.”

“Oh, but you don’t!”

“I think I do.” And after a moment, as her sobs grew quieter, I asked:
“It was you who took the dagger, wasn’t it?”

“Yes.”

“That was why you wanted me to show you round? And why you pretended to
faint?”

Again she nodded. It was a strange thought to come to me at the moment,
but it shot into my mind that I was glad her motive was what it had
been—rather than the idle and morbid curiosity I had accused her of at
the time. How gallantly she had played her part that day, inwardly
racked with fear and trepidation as she must have been. Poor little
soul, bearing the burden of a moment’s impetuous action.

“Why did you take the dagger?” I asked presently.

She replied as simply as a child:

“I was afraid there might be finger-marks on it.”

“But didn’t you remember that you had worn gloves?”

She shook her head as though bewildered, and then said slowly:

“Are you going to give me up to—to the Police?”

“Good God! no.”

Her eyes sought mine long and earnestly, and then she asked in a little
quiet voice that sounded afraid of itself:

“Why not?”

It seemed a strange place and a strange time for a declaration of
love—and God knows, in all my imagining, I had never pictured love
coming to me in such a guise. But I answered simply and naturally
enough:

“Because I love you, Cinderella.”

She bent her head down, as though ashamed, and muttered in a broken
voice:

“You can’t—you can’t—not if you knew—” And then, as though rallying
herself, she faced me squarely, and asked:

“What do you know, then?”

“I know that you came to see Mr. Renauld that night. He offered you a
cheque and you tore it up indignantly. Then you left the house—” I
paused.

“Go on—what next?”

“I don’t know whether you knew that Jack Renauld would be coming that
night, or whether you just waited about on the chance of seeing him,
but you did wait about. Perhaps you were just miserable, and walked
aimlessly—but at any rate just before twelve you were still near there,
and you saw a man on the golf links—”

Again I paused. I had leapt to the truth in a flash as she entered the
room, but now the picture rose before me even more convincingly. I saw
vividly the peculiar pattern of the overcoat on the dead body of Mr.
Renauld, and I remembered the amazing likeness that had startled me
into believing for one instant that the dead man had risen from the
dead when his son burst into our conclave in the _salon___.

“Go on,” repeated the girl steadily.

“I fancy his back was to you—but you recognized him, or thought you
recognized him. The gait and the carriage were familiar to you, and the
pattern of his overcoat.” I paused. “You told me in the train on the
way from Paris that you had Italian blood in your veins, and that you
had nearly got into trouble once with it. You used a threat in one of
your letters to Jack Renauld. When you saw him there, your anger and
jealousy drove you mad—and you struck! I don’t believe for a minute
that you meant to kill him. But you did kill him, Cinderella.”

She had flung up her hands to cover her face, and in a choked voice she
said:

“You’re right… you’re right… I can see it all as you tell it.” Then
she turned on me almost savagely. “And you love me? Knowing what you
do, how can you love me?”

“I don’t know,” I said a little wearily. “I think love is like that—a
thing one cannot help. I have tried, I know—ever since the first day I
met you. And love has been too strong for me.”

And then suddenly, when I least expected it, she broke down again,
casting herself down on the floor and sobbing wildly.

“Oh, I can’t!” she cried. “I don’t know what to do. I don’t know which
way to turn. Oh, pity me, pity me, some one, and tell me what to do!”

Again I knelt by her, soothing her as best I could.

“Don’t be afraid of me, Bella. For God’s sake don’t be afraid of me. I
love you, that’s true—but I don’t want anything in return. Only let me
help you. Love him still if you have to, but let me help you as he
can’t.”

It was as though she had been turned to stone by my words. She raised
her head from her hands and stared at me.

“You think that?” she whispered. “You think that I love Jack Renauld?”

Then, half laughing, half crying, she flung her arms passionately round
my neck, and pressed her sweet wet face to mine.

“Not as I love you,” she whispered. “Never as I love you!”

Her lips brushed my cheek, and then, seeking my mouth, kissed me again
and again with a sweetness and fire beyond belief. The wildness of
it—and the wonder, I shall not forget—no, not as long as I live!

It was a sound in the doorway that made us look up. Poirot was standing
there looking at us.

I did not hesitate. With a bound I reached him and pinioned his arms to
his sides.

“Quick,” I said to the girl. “Get out of here. As fast as you can. I’ll
hold him.”

With one look at me, she fled out of the room past us. I held Poirot in
a grip of iron.

“_Mon ami___,” observed the latter mildly, “you do this sort of thing
very well. The strong man holds me in his grasp and I am helpless as a
child. But all this is uncomfortable and slightly ridiculous. Let us
sit down and be calm.”

“You won’t pursue her?”

“_Mon Dieu!___ no. Am I Giraud? Release me, my friend.”

Keeping a suspicious eye upon him, for I paid Poirot the compliment of
knowing that I was no match for him in astuteness, I relaxed my grip,
and he sank into an arm-chair, feeling his arms tenderly.

“It is that you have the strength of a bull when you are roused,
Hastings! _Eh bien___, and do you think you have behaved well to your
old friend? I show you the girl’s photograph and you recognize it, but
you never say a word.”

“There was no need if you knew that I recognized it,” I said rather
bitterly. So Poirot had known all along! I had not deceived him for an
instant.

“Ta-ta! You did not know that I knew that. And tonight you help the
girl to escape when we have found her with so much trouble! _Eh
bien!___ it comes to this—are you going to work with me or against me,
Hastings?”

For a moment or two I did not answer. To break with my old friend gave
me great pain. Yet I must definitely range myself against him. Would he
ever forgive me, I wondered? He had been strangely calm so far, but I
knew him to possess marvellous self-command.

“Poirot,” I said, “I’m sorry. I admit I’ve behaved badly to you over
this. But sometimes one has no choice. And in future I must take my own
line.”

Poirot nodded his head several times.

“I understand,” he said. The mocking light had quite died out of his
eyes, and he spoke with a sincerity and kindness that surprised me. “It
is that, my friend, is it not? It is love that has come—not as you
imagined it, all cock a hoop with fine feathers, but sadly, with
bleeding feet. Well, well—I warned you. When I realized that this girl
must have taken the dagger, I warned you. Perhaps you remember. But
already it was too late. But, tell me, how much do you know?”

I met his eyes squarely.

“Nothing that you could tell me would be any surprise to me, Poirot.
Understand that. But in case you think of resuming your search for Miss
Duveen, I should like you to know one thing clearly. If you have any
idea that she was concerned in the crime, or was the mysterious lady
who called upon Mr. Renauld that night, you are wrong. I travelled home
from France with her that day, and parted from her at Victoria that
evening so that it is clearly impossible for her to have been in
Merlinville.”

“Ah!” Poirot looked at me thoughtfully. “And you would swear to that in
a court of law?”

“Most certainly I would.”

Poirot rose and bowed.

“_Mon ami! Vive l’amour!___ It can perform miracles. It is decidedly
ingenious what you have thought of there. It defeats even Hercule
Poirot!”




23 Difficulties Ahead

After a moment of stress, such as I have just described, reaction is
bound to set in. I retired to rest that night on a note of triumph, but
I awoke to realize that I was by no means out of the wood. True, I
could see no flaw in the alibi I had so suddenly conceived. I had but
to stick to my story, and I failed to see how Bella could be convicted
in face of it. It was not as though there was any old friendship
between us that could be raked up, and which might lead them to suspect
that I was committing perjury. It could be proved that in actual fact I
had only seen the girl on three occasions. No, I was still satisfied
with my idea—had not even Poirot admitted that it defeated him?

But there I felt the need of treading warily. All very well for my
little friend to admit himself momentarily nonplussed. I had far too
much respect for his abilities to conceive of him as being content to
remain in that position. I had a very humble opinion of my wits when it
came to matching them against his. Poirot would not take defeat lying
down. Somehow or other, he would endeavour to turn the tables on me,
and that in the way, and at the moment, when I least expected it.

We met at breakfast the following morning as though nothing had
happened. Poirot’s good temper was imperturbable, yet I thought I
detected a film of reserve in his manner which was new. After
breakfast, I announced my intention of going out for a stroll. A
malicious gleam shot through Poirot’s eyes.

“If it is information you seek, you need not be at the pains of
deranging yourself. I can tell you all you wish to know. The Dulcibella
Sisters have cancelled their contract, and have left Coventry for an
unknown destination.”

“Is that really so, Poirot?”

“You can take it from me, Hastings. I made inquiries the first thing
this morning. After all, what else did you expect?”

True enough, nothing else could be expected under the circumstances.
Cinderella had profited by the slight start I had been able to assure
her, and would certainly not lose a moment in removing herself from the
reach of the pursuer. It was what I had intended and planned.
Nevertheless, I was aware of being plunged into a network of fresh
difficulties.

I had absolutely no means of communicating with the girl, and it was
vital that she should know the line of defence that had occurred to me,
and which I was prepared to carry out. Of course it was possible that
she might try to send word to me in some way or another, but I hardly
thought it likely. She would know the risk she ran of a message being
intercepted by Poirot, thus setting him on her track once more. Clearly
her only course was to disappear utterly for the time being.

But, in the meantime, what was Poirot doing? I studied him attentively.
He was wearing his most innocent air, and staring meditatively into the
far distance. He looked altogether too placid and supine to give me
reassurance. I had learned, with Poirot, that the less dangerous he
looked, the more dangerous he was. His quiescence alarmed me. Observing
a troubled quality in my glance, he smiled benignantly.

“You are puzzled, Hastings? You ask yourself why I do not launch myself
in pursuit?”

“Well—something of the kind.”

“It is what you would do, were you in my place. I understand that. But
I am not of those who enjoy rushing up and down a country seeking a
needle in a haystack, as you English say. No—let Mademoiselle Bella
Duveen go. Without doubt, I shall be able to find her when the time
comes. Until then, I am content to wait.”

I stared at him doubtfully. Was he seeking to mislead me? I had an
irritating feeling that, even now, he was master of the situation. My
sense of superiority was gradually waning. I had contrived the girl’s
escape, and evolved a brilliant scheme for saving her from the
consequences of her rash act—but I could not rest easy in my mind.
Poirot’s perfect calm awakened a thousand apprehensions.

“I suppose, Poirot,” I said rather diffidently, “I mustn’t ask what
your plans are? I’ve forfeited the right.”

“But not at all. There is no secret about them. We return to France
without delay.”

“_We?___”

“Precisely—‘_we!___’ You know very well that you cannot afford to let
Papa Poirot out of your sight. Eh, is it not so, my friend? But remain
in England by all means if you wish—”

I shook my head. He had hit the nail on the head. I could not afford to
let him out of my sight. Although I could not expect his confidence
after what had happened, I could still check his actions. The only
danger to Bella lay with him. Giraud and the French police were
indifferent to her existence. At all costs I must keep near Poirot.

Poirot observed me attentively as these reflections passed through my
mind, and gave a nod of satisfaction.

“I am right, am I not? And as you are quite capable of trying to follow
me, disguised with some absurdity such as a false beard—which every one
would perceive, _bien entendu___—I much prefer that we should voyage
together. It would annoy me greatly that any one should mock themselves
at you.”

“Very well, then. But it’s only fair to warn you—”

“I know—I know all. You are my enemy! Be my enemy then. It does not
worry me at all.”

“So long as it’s all fair and above-board, I don’t mind.”

“You have to the full the English passion for ‘fair-play!’ Now your
scruples are satisfied, let us depart immediately. There is no time to
be lost. Our stay in England has been short but sufficient. I know—what
I wanted to know.”

The tone was light, but I read a veiled menace into the words.

“Still—” I began, and stopped.

“Still—as you say! Without doubt you are satisfied with the part you
are playing. Me, I preoccupy myself with Jack Renauld.”

Jack Renauld! The words gave me a start. I had completely forgotten
that aspect of the case. Jack Renauld, in prison, with the shadow of
the guillotine looming over him! I saw the part I was playing in a more
sinister light. I could save Bella—yes, but in doing so I ran the risk
of sending an innocent man to his death.

I pushed the thought from me with horror. It could not be. He would be
acquitted. Certainly he would be acquitted! But the cold fear came
back. Suppose he were not? What then? Could I have it on my
conscience—horrible thought! Would it come to that in the end? A
decision. Bella or Jack Renauld? The promptings of my heart were to
save the girl I loved at any cost to myself. But, if the cost were to
another, the problem was altered.

What would the girl herself say? I remembered that no word of Jack
Renauld’s arrest had passed my lips. As yet she was in total ignorance
of the fact that her former lover was in prison charged with a hideous
crime which he had not committed. When she knew, how would she act?
Would she permit her life to be saved at the expense of his? Certainly
she must do nothing rash. Jack Renauld might, and probably would, be
acquitted without any intervention on her part. If so, good. But if he
was not.… That was the terrible, the unanswerable problem. I fancied
that she ran no risk of the extreme penalty. The circumstances of the
crime were quite different in her case. She could plead jealousy and
extreme provocation, and her youth and beauty would go for much. The
fact that by a tragic mistake it was old Mr. Renauld, and not his son,
who paid the penalty would not alter the motive of the crime. But in
any case, however lenient the sentence of the Court, it must mean a
long term of imprisonment.

No, Bella must be protected. And, at the same time, Jack Renauld must
be saved. How this was to be accomplished I did not see clearly. But I
pinned my faith to Poirot. He knew. Come what might, he would manage to
save an innocent man. He must find some pretext other than the real
one. It might be difficult, but he would manage it somehow. And with
Bella unsuspected, and Jack Renauld acquitted, all would end
satisfactorily.

So I told myself repeatedly, but at the bottom of my heart there still
remained a cold fear.




24 “Save Him!”

We crossed from England by the evening boat, and the following morning
saw us in Saint-Omer, whither Jack Renauld had been taken. Poirot lost
no time in visiting M. Hautet. As he did not seem disposed to make any
objections to my accompanying him, I bore him company.

After various formalities and preliminaries, we were conducted to the
examining magistrate’s room. He greeted us cordially.

“I was told that you had returned to England, M. Poirot. I am glad to
find that such is not the case.”

“It is true that I went there, M. le juge, but it was only for a flying
visit. A side issue, but one that I fancied might repay investigation.”

“And it did—eh?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. M. Hautet nodded, sighing.

“We must resign ourselves, I fear. That animal Giraud, his manners are
abominable, but he is undoubtedly clever! Not much chance of that one
making a mistake.”

“You think not, M. le juge?”

It was the examining magistrate’s turn to shrug his shoulders.

“_Eh bien___, speaking frankly—in confidence, _c’est entendu___—can you
come to any other conclusion?”

“Frankly, M. le juge, there seem to me to be many points that are
obscure.”

“Such as—?”

But Poirot was not to be drawn.

“I have not yet tabulated them,” he remarked. “It was a general
reflection that I was making. I liked the young man, and should be
sorry to believe him guilty of such a hideous crime. By the way, what
has he to say for himself on the matter?”

The magistrate frowned.

“I cannot understand him. He seems incapable of putting up any sort of
defence. It has been most difficult to get him to answer questions. He
contents himself with a general denial, and beyond that takes refuge in
a most obstinate silence. I am interrogating him again tomorrow;
perhaps you would like to be present?”

We accepted the invitation with _empressement___.

“A distressing case,” said the magistrate with a sigh. “My sympathy for
Madame Renauld is profound.”

“How is Madame Renauld?”

“She has not yet recovered consciousness. It is merciful in a way, poor
woman, she is being spared much. The doctors say that there is no
danger, but that when she comes to herself she must be kept as quiet as
possible. It was, I understand, quite as much the shock as the fall
which caused her present state. It would be terrible if her brain
became unhinged; but I should not wonder at all—no, really, not at
all.”

M. Hautet leaned back, shaking his head, with a sort of mournful
enjoyment, as he envisaged the gloomy prospect.

He roused himself at length, and observed with a start.

“That reminds me. I have here a letter for you, M. Poirot. Let me see,
where did I put it?”

He proceeded to rummage amongst his papers. At last he found the
missive, and handed it to Poirot.

“It was sent under cover to me in order that I might forward it to
you,” he explained. “But as you left no address I could not do so.”

Poirot studied the letter curiously. It was addressed in a long,
sloping, foreign hand, and the writing was decidedly a woman’s. Poirot
did not open it. Instead he put it in his pocket and rose to his feet.

“_A demain___ then, M. le juge. Many thanks for your courtesy and
amiability.”

“But not at all. I am always at your service. These young detectives of
the school of Giraud, they are all alike—rude, sneering fellows. They
do not realize that an examining magistrate of my—er—experience is
bound to have a certain discernment, a certain—_flair___. _Enfin!___
the politeness of the old school is infinitely more to my taste.
Therefore, my dear friend, command me in any way you will. We know a
thing or two, you and I—eh?”

And laughing heartily, enchanted with himself and with us, M. Hautet
bade us adieu. I am sorry to have to record that Poirot’s first remark
to me as we traversed the corridor was:

“A famous old imbecile, that one! Of a stupidity to make pity!”

We were just leaving the building when we came face to face with
Giraud, looking more dandified than ever, and thoroughly pleased with
himself.

“Aha! M. Poirot,” he cried airily. “You have returned from England
then?”

“As you see,” said Poirot.

“The end of the case is not far off now, I fancy.”

“I agree with you, M. Giraud.”

Poirot spoke in a subdued tone. His crest-fallen manner seemed to
delight the other.

“Of all the milk and water criminals! Not an idea of defending himself.
It is extraordinary!”

“So extraordinary that it gives one to think, does it not?” suggested
Poirot mildly.

But Giraud was not even listening. He twirled his cane amicably.

“Well, good day, M. Poirot. I am glad you’re satisfied of young
Renauld’s guilt at last.”

“_Pardon!___ But I am not in the least satisfied. Jack Renauld is
innocent.”

Giraud stared for a moment—then burst out laughing, tapping his head
significantly with the brief remark: “_Toqué!___”

Poirot drew himself up. A dangerous light showed in his eyes.

“M. Giraud, throughout the case your manner to me has been deliberately
insulting! You need teaching a lesson. I am prepared to wager you 500
francs that I find the murderer of M. Renauld before you do. Is it
agreed?”

Giraud stared helplessly at him, and murmured again:

“_Toqué!___”

“Come now,” urged Poirot, “is it agreed?”

“I have no wish to take your money from you.”

“Make your mind easy—you will not!”

“Oh, well then, I agree! You speak of my manner to you being insulting.
_Eh bien___, once or twice, _your___ manner has annoyed _me___.”

“I am enchanted to hear it,” said Poirot. “Good morning, M. Giraud.
Come, Hastings.”

I said no word as we walked along the street. My heart was heavy.
Poirot had displayed his intentions only too plainly. I doubted more
than ever my powers of saving Bella from the consequences of her act.
This unlucky encounter with Giraud had roused Poirot and put him on his
mettle.

Suddenly I felt a hand laid on my shoulder, and turned to face Gabriel
Stonor. We stopped and greeted him, and he proposed strolling with us
back to our hotel.

“And what are you doing here, M. Stonor?” inquired Poirot.

“One must stand by one’s friends,” replied the other dryly. “Especially
when they are unjustly accused.”

“Then you do not believe that Jack Renauld committed the crime?” I
asked eagerly.

“Certainly I don’t. I know the lad. I admit that there have been one or
two things in this business that have staggered me completely, but none
the less, in spite of his fool way of taking it, I’ll never believe
that Jack Renauld is a murderer.”

My heart warmed to the secretary. His words seemed to lift a secret
weight from my heart.

“I have no doubt that many people feel as you do,” I exclaimed. “There
is really absurdly little evidence against him. I should say that there
was no doubt of his acquittal—no doubt whatever.”

But Stonor hardly responded as I could have wished.

“I’d give a lot to think as you do,” he said gravely. He turned to
Poirot. “What’s your opinion, monsieur?”

“I think that things look very black against him,” said Poirot quietly.

“You believe him guilty?” said Stonor sharply.

“No. But I think he will find it hard to prove his innocence.”

“He’s behaving so damned queerly,” muttered Stonor. “Of course I
realize that there’s a lot more in this affair than meets the eye.
Giraud’s not wise to that because he’s an outsider, but the whole thing
has been damned odd. As to that, least said soonest mended. If Mrs.
Renauld wants to hush anything up, I’ll take my cue from her. It’s her
show, and I’ve too much respect for her judgment to shove my oar in,
but I can’t get behind this attitude of Jack’s. Any one would think he
_wanted___ to be thought guilty.”

“But it’s absurd,” I cried, bursting in. “For one thing, the dagger—” I
paused, uncertain as to how much Poirot would wish me to reveal. I
continued, choosing my words carefully, “We know that the dagger could
not have been in Jack Renauld’s possession that evening. Mrs. Renauld
knows that.”

“True,” said Stonor. “When she recovers, she will doubtless say all
this and more. Well, I must be leaving you.”

“One moment.” Poirot’s hand arrested his departure. “Can you arrange
for word to be sent to me at once should Madame Renauld recover
consciousness?”

“Certainly. That’s easily done.”

“That point about the dagger is good, Poirot,” I urged as we went
upstairs. “I couldn’t speak very plainly before Stonor.”

“That was quite right of you. We might as well keep the knowledge to
ourselves as long as we can. As to the dagger, your point hardly helps
Jack Renauld. You remember that I was absent for an hour this morning,
before we started from London?”

“Yes?”

“Well, I was employed in trying to find the firm Jack Renauld employed
to convert his souvenirs. It was not very difficult. _Eh bien___,
Hastings, they made to his order not _two___ paper-knives, but
_three___.”

“So that—?”

“So that, after giving one to his mother, and one to Bella Duveen,
there was a third which he doubtless retained for his own use. No,
Hastings, I fear the dagger question will not help us to save him from
the guillotine.”

“It won’t come to that,” I cried, stung.

Poirot shook his head uncertainly.

“You will save him,” I cried positively.

Poirot glanced at me dryly.

“Have you not rendered it impossible, _mon ami?___”

“Some other way,” I muttered.

“Ah! _Sapristi!___ But it is miracles you ask from me. No—say no more.
Let us instead see what is in this letter.”

And he drew out the envelope from his breast pocket.

His face contracted as he read, then he handed the one flimsy sheet to
me.

“There are other women in the world who suffer, Hastings.”

The writing was blurred and the note had evidently been written in
great agitation:

“_Dear M. Poirot:___
“If you get this, I beg of you to come to my aid. I have no one to turn
to, and at all costs Jack must be saved. I implore of you on my knees
to help us.


“MARTHE DAUBREUIL.”


I handed it back, moved.

“You will go?”

“At once. We will command an auto.”

Half an hour later saw us at the Villa Marguerite. Marthe was at the
door to meet us, and led Poirot in, clinging with both hands to one of
his.

“Ah, you have come—it is good of you. I have been in despair, not
knowing what to do. They will not let me go to see him in prison even.
I suffer horribly, I am nearly mad. Is it true what they say, that he
does not deny the crime? But that is madness. It is impossible that he
should have done it! Never for one minute will I believe it.”

“Neither do I believe it, mademoiselle,” said Poirot gently.

“But then why does he not speak? I do not understand.”

“Perhaps because he is screening some one,” suggested Poirot, watching
her.

Marthe frowned.

“Screening some one? Do you mean his mother? Ah, from the beginning I
have suspected her. Who inherits all that vast fortune? She does. It is
easy to wear widow’s weeds and play the hypocrite. And they say that
when he was arrested she fell down—like _that___.” She made a dramatic
gesture. “And without doubt, M. Stonor, the secretary, he helped her.
They are thick as thieves, those two. It is true she is older than
he—but what do men care—if a woman is rich!”

There was a hint of bitterness in her tone.

“Stonor was in England,” I put in.

“He says so—but who knows?”

“Mademoiselle,” said Poirot quietly, “if we are to work together, you
and I, we must have things clear. First, I will ask you a question.”

“Yes, monsieur?”

“Are you aware of your mother’s real name?”

Marthe looked at him for a minute, then, letting her head fall forward
on her arms, she burst into tears.

“There, there,” said Poirot, patting her on the shoulder. “Calm
yourself, _petite___, I see that you know. Now a second question, did
you know who M. Renauld was?”

“M. Renauld,” she raised her head from her hands and gazed at him
wonderingly.

“Ah, I see you do not know that. Now listen to me carefully.”

Step by step, he went over the case, much as he had done to me on the
day of our departure for England. Marthe listened spellbound. When he
had finished, she drew a long breath.

“But you are wonderful—magnificent! You are the greatest detective in
the world.”

With a swift gesture she slipped off her chair and knelt before him
with an abandonment that was wholly French.

“Save him, monsieur,” she cried. “I love him so. Oh, save him, save
him—save him!”




25 An Unexpected Dénouement

We were present the following morning at the examination of Jack
Renauld. Short as the time had been, I was shocked at the change that
had taken place in the young prisoner. His cheeks had fallen in, there
were deep black circles round his eyes, and he looked haggard and
distraught, as one who had wooed sleep in vain for several nights. He
betrayed no emotion at seeing us.

The prisoner and his counsel, Maître Grosíer, were accommodated with
chairs. A formidable guard with resplendent sabre stood before the
door. The patient _greffier___ sat at his desk. The examination began.

“Renauld,” began the magistrate, “do you deny that you were in
Merlinville on the night of the crime?”

Jack did not reply at once, then he said with a hesitancy of manner
which was piteous:

“I—I—told you that I was in Cherbourg.”

Maître Grosíer frowned and sighed. I realized at once that Jack Renauld
was obstinately bent on conducting his own case as he wished, to the
despair of his legal representative.

The magistrate turned sharply.

“Send in the station witnesses.”

In a moment or two the door opened to admit a man whom I recognized as
being a porter at Merlinville station.

“You were on duty on the night of June 7th?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“You witnessed the arrival of the 11:40 train?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Look at the prisoner. Do you recognize him as having been one of the
passengers to alight?”

“Yes, Monsieur le juge.”

“There is no possibility of your being mistaken?”

“No, monsieur. I knew M. Jack Renauld well.”

“Nor of your being mistaken as to the date?”

“No, monsieur. Because it was the following morning, June 8th, that we
heard of the murder.”

Another railway official was brought in, and confirmed the first one’s
evidence. The magistrate looked at Jack Renauld.

“These men have identified you positively. What have you to say?”

Jack shrugged his shoulders.

“Nothing.”

M. Hautet exchanged a glance with the _greffier___, as the scratching
of the latter’s pen recorded the answer.

“Renauld,” continued the magistrate, “do you recognize this?”

He took something from the table by his side, and held it out to the
prisoner. I shuddered as I recognized the aeroplane dagger.

“Pardon,” cried Maître Grosíer. “I demand to speak to my client before
he answers that question.”

But Jack Renauld had no consideration for the feelings of the wretched
Grosíer. He waved him aside, and replied quietly:

“Certainly I recognize it. It is a present given by me to my mother, as
a souvenir of the War.”

“Is there, as far as you know, any duplicate of that dagger in
existence?”

Again Maître Grosíer burst out, and again Jack overrode him.

“Not that I know of. The setting was my own design.”

Even the magistrate almost gasped at the boldness of the reply. It did,
in very truth, seem as though Jack was rushing on his fate. I realized,
of course, the vital necessity he was under of concealing, for Bella’s
sake, the fact that there was a duplicate dagger in the case. So long
as there was supposed to be only one weapon, no suspicion was likely to
attach to the girl who had had the second paper-knife in her
possession. He was valiantly shielding the woman he had once loved—but
at what a cost to himself! I began to realize the magnitude of the task
I had so lightly set Poirot. It would not be easy to secure the
acquittal of Jack Renauld, by anything short of the truth.

M. Hautet spoke again, with a peculiarly biting inflection:

“Madame Renauld told us that this dagger was on her dressing table on
the night of the crime. But Madame Renauld is a mother! It will
doubtless astonish you, Renauld, but I consider it highly likely that
Madame Renauld was mistaken, and that, by inadvertence perhaps, you had
taken it with you to Paris. Doubtless you will contradict me—”

I saw the lad’s handcuffed hands clench themselves. The perspiration
stood out in beads upon his brow, as with a supreme effort he
interrupted M. Hautet in a hoarse voice:

“I shall not contradict you. It is possible.”

It was a stupefying moment. Maître Grosíer rose to his feet,
protesting:

“My client has undergone a considerable nervous strain. I should wish
it put on record that I do not consider him answerable for what he
says.”

The magistrate quelled him angrily. For a moment a doubt seemed to
arise in his own mind. Jack Renauld had almost overdone his part. He
leaned forward, and gazed at the prisoner searchingly.

“Do you fully understand, Renauld, that on the answers you have given
me I shall have no alternative but to commit you for trial?”

Jack’s pale face flushed. He looked steadily back.

“M. Hautet, I swear that I did not kill my father.”

But the magistrate’s brief moment of doubt was over. He laughed a
short, unpleasant laugh.

“Without doubt, without doubt—they are always innocent, our prisoners!
By your own mouth you are condemned. You can offer no defence, no
alibi—only a mere assertion which would not deceive a babe!—that you
are not guilty. You killed your father, Renauld—cruel and cowardly
murder—for the sake of money which you believed would come to you at
his death. Your mother was an accessory after the fact. Doubtless, in
view of the fact that she acted as a mother, the courts will extend an
indulgence to her that they will not accord to you. And rightly so!
Your crime was a horrible one—to be held in abhorrence by gods and
men!” M. Hautet was enjoying himself, working up his period, steeped in
the solemnity of the moment, and his own role as representative of
justice. “You killed—and you must pay the consequences of your action.
I speak to you, not as a man, but as Justice, eternal Justice, which—”

M. Hautet was interrupted—to his intense annoyance. The door was pushed
open.

“M. le juge, M. le juge,” stammered the attendant, “there is a lady who
says—who says—”

“Who says what?” cried the justly incensed magistrate. “This is highly
irregular. I forbid it—I absolutely forbid it.”

But a slender figure pushed the stammering gendarme aside. Dressed all
in black, with a long veil that hid her face, she advanced into the
room.

My heart gave a sickening throb. She had come then! All my efforts were
in vain. Yet I could not but admire the courage that had led her to
take this step so unfalteringly.

She raised her veil—and I gasped. For, though as like her as two peas,
this girl was not Cinderella! On the other hand, now that I saw her
without the fair wig she had worn on the stage, I recognized her as the
girl of the photograph in Jack Renauld’s room.

“You are the Juge d’Instruction, M. Hautet?” she queried.

“Yes, but I forbid—”

“My name is Bella Duveen. I wish to give myself up for the murder of
Mr. Renauld.”




26 I Receive a Letter

“_My Friend:___
    “You will know all when you get this. Nothing that I can say will
    move Bella. She has gone out to give herself up. I am tired out
    with struggling.
    “You will know now that I deceived you, that where you gave me
    trust I repaid you with lies. It will seem, perhaps, indefensible
    to you, but I should like, before I go out of your life for ever,
    to show you just how it all came about. If I knew that you forgave
    me, it would make life easier for me. It wasn’t for myself I did
    it—that’s the only thing I can put forward to say for myself.
    “I’ll begin from the day I met you in the boat train from Paris. I
    was uneasy then about Bella. She was just desperate about Jack
    Renauld, she’d have lain down on the ground for him to walk on, and
    when he began to change, and to stop writing so often, she began
    getting in a state. She got it into her head that he was keen on
    another girl—and of course, as it turned out afterwards, she was
    quite right there. She’d made up her mind to go to their Villa at
    Merlinville, and try and see Jack. She knew I was against it, and
    tried to give me the slip. I found she was not on the train at
    Calais, and determined I would not go on to England without her.
    I’d an uneasy feeling that something awful was going to happen if I
    couldn’t prevent it.
    “I met the next train from Paris. She was on it, and set upon going
    out then and there to Merlinville. I argued with her for all I was
    worth, but it wasn’t any good. She was all strung up and set upon
    having her own way. Well, I washed my hands of it. I’d done all I
    could! It was getting late. I went to an hotel, and Bella started
    for Merlinville. I still couldn’t shake off my feeling of what the
    books call ‘impending disaster.’
    “The next day came—but no Bella. She’d made a date with me to meet
    at the hotel, but she didn’t keep it. No sign of her all day. I got
    more and more anxious. Then came an evening paper with the news.
    “It was awful! I couldn’t be sure, of course—but I was terribly
    afraid. I figured it out that Bella had met Papa Renauld and told
    him about her and Jack, and that he’d insulted her or something
    like that. We’ve both got terribly quick tempers.
    “Then all the masked foreigner business came out, and I began to
    feel more at ease. But it still worried me that Bella hadn’t kept
    her date with me.
    “By the next morning, I was so rattled that I’d just got to go and
    see what I could. First thing, I ran up against you. You know all
    that… When I saw the dead man, looking so like Jack, and wearing
    Jack’s fancy overcoat, I knew! And there was the identical
    paper-knife—wicked little thing!—that Jack had given Bella! Ten to
    one it had her finger-marks on it. I can’t hope to explain to you
    the sort of helpless horror of that moment. I only saw one thing
    clearly—I must get hold of that dagger, and get right away with it
    before they found out it was gone. I pretended to faint, and whilst
    you were away getting water I took the thing and hid it away in my
    dress.
    “I told you that I was staying at the Hôtel du Phare, but of course
    really I made a bee line back to Calais, and then on to England by
    the first boat. When we were in mid-Channel, I dropped that little
    devil of a dagger into the sea. Then I felt I could breathe again.
    “Bella was at our digs in London. She looked like nothing on God’s
    earth. I told her what I’d done, and that she was pretty safe for
    the time being. She stared at me, and then began laughing…
    laughing… laughing… it was horrible to hear her! I felt that the
    best thing to do was to keep busy. She’d go mad if she had time to
    brood on what she’d done. Luckily we got an engagement at once.
    “And then, I saw you and your friend, watching us that night… I
    was frantic. You must suspect, or you wouldn’t have tracked us
    down. I had to know the worst, so I followed you. I was desperate.
    And then, before I’d had time to say anything, I tumbled to it that
    it was _me___ you suspected, not Bella! Or at least that you
    thought I _was___ Bella since I’d stolen the dagger.
    “I wish, honey, that you could see back into my mind at that
    moment… you’d forgive me, perhaps… I was so frightened, and
    muddled, and desperate.… All I could get clearly was that you
    would try and save me. I didn’t know whether you’d be willing to
    save her… I thought very likely not—it wasn’t the same thing! And
    I couldn’t risk it! Bella’s my twin—I’d got to do the best for her.
    So I went on lying.… I felt mean—I feel mean still.… That’s
    all—enough too, you’ll say, I expect. I ought to have trusted
    you.… If I had—
    “As soon as the news was in the paper that Jack Renauld had been
    arrested, it was all up. Bella wouldn’t even wait to see how things
    went.…
    “I’m very tired.… I can’t write any more.…”


She had begun to sign herself Cinderella, but had crossed that out and
written instead “Dulcie Duveen.”

It was an ill-written, blurred epistle but I have kept it to this day.

Poirot was with me when I read it. The sheets fell from my hand, and I
looked across at him.

“Did you know all the time that it was—the other?”

“Yes, my friend.”

“Why did you not tell me?”

“To begin with, I could hardly believe it conceivable that you could
make such a mistake. You had seen the photograph. The sisters are very
alike, but by no means incapable of distinguishment.”

“But the fair hair?”

“A wig, worn for the sake of a piquant contrast on the stage. Is it
conceivable that with twins one should be fair and one dark?”

“Why didn’t you tell me that night at the hotel in Coventry?”

“You were rather high-handed in your methods, _mon ami___,” said Poirot
dryly. “You did not give me a chance.”

“But afterwards?”

“Ah, afterwards! Well, to begin with, I was hurt at your want of faith
in me. And then, I wanted to see whether your—feelings would stand the
test of time. In fact, whether it was love, or a flash in the pan, with
you. I should not have left you long in your error.”

I nodded. His tone was too affectionate for me to bear resentment. I
looked down on the sheets of the letter. Suddenly I picked them up from
the floor, and pushed them across to him.

“Read that,” I said. “I’d like you to.”

He read it through in silence, then he looked up at me.

“What is it that worries you, Hastings?”

This was quite a new mood in Poirot. His mocking manner seemed laid
quite aside. I was able to say what I wanted without too much
difficulty.

“She doesn’t say—she doesn’t say—well, not whether she cares for me or
not!”

Poirot turned back the pages.

“I think you are mistaken, Hastings.”

“Where?” I cried, leaning forward eagerly.

Poirot smiled.

“She tells you that in every line of the letter, _mon ami___.”

“But where am I to find her? There’s no address on the letter. There’s
a French stamp, that’s all.”

“Excite yourself not! Leave it to Papa Poirot. I can find her for you
as soon as I have five little minutes!”




27 Jack Renauld’s Story

“Congratulations, M. Jack,” said Poirot, wringing the lad warmly by the
hand.

Young Renauld had come to us as soon as he was liberated—before
starting for Merlinville to rejoin Marthe and his mother. Stonor
accompanied him. His heartiness was in strong contrast to the lad’s wan
looks. It was plain that the boy was on the verge of a nervous
breakdown. Although delivered from the immediate peril that was hanging
over him, the circumstances of his release were too painful to let him
feel full relief. He smiled mournfully at Poirot, and said in a low
voice:

“I went through it to protect her, and now it’s all no use!”

“You could hardly expect the girl to accept the price of your life,”
remarked Stonor dryly. “She was bound to come forward when she saw you
heading straight for the guillotine.”

“_Eh ma foi!___ and you were heading for it too!” added Poirot, with a
slight twinkle. “You would have had Maître Grosíer’s death from rage on
your conscience if you had gone on.”

“He was a well meaning ass, I suppose,” said Jack. “But he worried me
horribly. You see, I couldn’t very well take him into my confidence.
But, my God! what’s going to happen about Bella?”

“If I were you,” said Poirot frankly, “I should not distress myself
unduly. The French Courts are very lenient to youth and beauty, and the
_crime passionnel___. A clever lawyer will make out a great case of
extenuating circumstances. It will not be pleasant for you—”

“I don’t care about that. You see, M. Poirot, in a way I _do___ feel
guilty of my father’s murder. But for me, and my entanglement with this
girl, he would be alive and well today. And then my cursed carelessness
in taking away the wrong overcoat. I can’t help feeling responsible for
his death. It will haunt me for ever!”

“No, no,” I said soothingly.

“Of course it’s horrible to me to think that Bella killed my father,”
resumed Jack, “but I’d treated her shamefully. After I met Marthe, and
realized I’d made a mistake, I ought to have written and told her so
honestly. But I was so terrified of a row, and of its coming to
Marthe’s ears, and her thinking there was more in it than there ever
had been, that—well, I was a coward, and went on hoping the thing would
die down of itself. I just drifted, in fact—not realizing that I was
driving the poor kid desperate. If she’d really knifed me, as she meant
to, I should have got no more than my deserts. And the way she’s come
forward now is downright plucky. I’d have stood the racket, you know—up
to the end.”

He was silent for a moment or two, and then burst out on another tack:

“What gets me is why the Governor should be wandering about in
underclothes and my overcoat at that time of night. I suppose he’d just
given the foreign johnnies the slip, and my mother must have made a
mistake about its being 2 o’clock when they came. Or—or, it wasn’t all
a frame up, was it? I mean, my mother didn’t think—couldn’t
think—that—that it was _me?___”

Poirot reassured him quickly.

“No, no, M. Jack. Have no fears on that score. As for the rest, I will
explain it to you one of these days. It is rather curious. But will you
recount to us exactly what did occur on that terrible evening?”

“There’s very little to tell. I came from Cherbourg, as I told you, in
order to see Marthe before going to the other end of the world. The
train was late, and I decided to take the short cut across the golf
links. I could easily get into the grounds of the Villa Marguerite from
there. I had nearly reached the place when—”

He paused and swallowed.

“Yes?”

“I heard a terrible cry. It wasn’t loud—a sort of choke and gasp—but it
frightened me. For a moment I stood rooted to the spot. Then I came
round the corner of a bush. There was moonlight. I saw the grave, and a
figure lying face downwards, with a dagger sticking in the back. And
then—and then—I looked up and saw _her___. She was looking at me as
though she saw a ghost—it’s what she must have thought me at first—all
expression seemed frozen out of her face by horror. And then she gave a
cry, and turned and ran.”

He stopped, trying to master his emotion.

“And afterwards?” asked Poirot gently.

“I really don’t know. I stayed there for a time, dazed. And then I
realized I’d better get away as fast as I could. It didn’t occur to me
that they would suspect me, but I was afraid of being called upon to
give evidence against her. I walked to St. Beauvais as I told you, and
got a car from there back to Cherbourg.”

A knock came at the door, and a page entered with a telegram which he
delivered to Stonor. He tore it open. Then he got up from his seat.

“Mrs. Renauld has regained consciousness,” he said.

“Ah!” Poirot sprang to his feet. “Let us all go to Merlinville at
once!”

A hurried departure was made forthwith. Stonor, at Jack’s instance,
agreed to stay behind and do all that could be done for Bella Duveen.
Poirot, Jack Renauld and I set off in the Renauld car.

The run took just over forty minutes. As we approached the doorway of
the Villa Marguerite, Jack Renauld shot a questioning glance at Poirot.

“How would it be if you went on first—to break the news to my mother
that I am free—”

“While you break it in person to Mademoiselle Marthe, eh?” finished
Poirot, with a twinkle. “But yes, by all means, I was about to propose
such an arrangement myself.”

Jack Renauld did not wait for more. Stopping the car, he swung himself
out, and ran up the path to the front door. We went on in the car to
the Villa Geneviève.

“Poirot,” I said, “do you remember how we arrived here that first day?
And were met by the news of M. Renauld’s murder?”

“Ah! yes, truly. Not so long ago, either. But what a lot of things have
happened since then—especially for you, _mon ami!___”

“Poirot, what have you done about finding Bel—I mean Dulcie?”

“Calm yourself, Hastings. I arrange everything.”

“You’re being a precious long time about it,” I grumbled.

Poirot changed the subject.

“Then the beginning, now the end,” he moralized, as we rang the bell.
“And, considered as a case, the end is profoundly unsatisfactory.”

“Yes, indeed,” I sighed.

“You are regarding it from the sentimental standpoint, Hastings. That
was not my meaning. We will hope that Mademoiselle Bella will be dealt
with leniently, and after all Jack Renauld cannot marry both the girls.
I spoke from a professional standpoint. This is not a crime well
ordered and regular, such as a detective delights in. The _mise en
scène___ designed by Georges Conneau, that indeed is perfect, but the
_dénouement___—ah, no! A man killed by accident in a girl’s fit of
anger—ah, indeed, what order or method is there in that?”

And in the midst of a fit of laughter on my part at Poirot’s
peculiarities, the door was opened by Françoise.

Poirot explained that he must see Mrs. Renauld at once, and the old
woman conducted him upstairs. I remained in the _salon___. It was some
time before Poirot reappeared. He was looking unusually grave.

“_Vous voilà___, Hastings! _Sacré tonnerre___, but there are squalls
ahead!”

“What do you mean?” I cried.

“I would hardly have credited it,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “but women
are very unexpected.”

“Here are Jack and Marthe Daubreuil,” I exclaimed, looking out of the
window.

Poirot bounded out of the room, and met the young couple on the steps
outside.

“Do not enter. It is better not. Your mother is very upset.”

“I know, I know,” said Jack Renauld. “I must go up to her at once.”

“But no, I tell you. It is better not.”

“But Marthe and I—”

“In any case, do not take Mademoiselle with you. Mount, if you must,
but you would be wise to be guided by me.”

A voice on the stairs behind made us all start.

“I thank you for your good offices, M. Poirot, but I will make my own
wishes clear.”

We stared in astonishment. Descending the stairs, leaning upon Léonie’s
arm, was Mrs. Renauld, her head still bandaged. The French girl was
weeping, and imploring her mistress to return to bed.

“Madame will kill herself. It is contrary to all the doctor’s orders!”

But Mrs. Renauld came on.

“Mother,” cried Jack, starting forward. But with a gesture she drove
him back.

“I am no mother of yours! You are no son of mine! From this day and
hour I renounce you.”

“Mother,” cried the lad, stupefied.

For a moment she seemed to waver, to falter before the anguish in his
voice. Poirot made a mediating gesture, but instantly she regained
command of herself.

“Your father’s blood is on your head. You are morally guilty of his
death. You thwarted and defied him over this girl, and by your
heartless treatment of another girl, you brought about his death. Go
out from my house. Tomorrow I intend to take such steps as shall make
it certain that you shall never touch a penny of his money. Make your
way in the world as best you can with the help of the girl who is the
daughter of your father’s bitterest enemy!”

And slowly, painfully, she retraced her way upstairs.

We were all dumbfounded—totally unprepared for such a demonstration.
Jack Renauld, worn out with all he had already gone through, swayed and
nearly fell. Poirot and I went quickly to his assistance.

“He is overdone,” murmured Poirot to Marthe. “Where can we take him?”

“But home! To the Villa Marguerite. We will nurse him, my mother and I.
My poor Jack!”

We got the lad to the Villa, where he dropped limply on to a chair in a
semi-dazed condition. Poirot felt his head and hands.

“He has fever. The long strain begins to tell. And now this shock on
top of it. Get him to bed, and Hastings and I will summon a doctor.”

A doctor was soon procured. After examining the patient, he gave it as
his opinion that it was simply a case of nerve strain. With perfect
rest and quiet, the lad might be almost restored by the next day, but,
if excited, there was a chance of brain fever. It would be advisable
for some one to sit up all night with him.

Finally, having done all we could, we left him in the charge of Marthe
and her mother, and set out for the town. It was past our usual hour of
dining, and we were both famished. The first restaurant we came to
assuaged the pangs of hunger with an excellent _omelette___, and an
equally excellent _entrecôte___ to follow.

“And now for quarters for the night,” said Poirot, when at length _café
noir___ had completed the meal. “Shall we try our old friend, the Hôtel
des Bains?”

We traced our steps there without more ado. Yes, Messieurs could be
accommodated with two good rooms overlooking the sea. Then Poirot asked
a question which surprised me.

“Has an English lady, Miss Robinson, arrived?”

“Yes, monsieur. She is in the little _salon___.”

“Ah!”

“Poirot,” I cried, keeping pace with him as he walked along the
corridor, “who on earth is Miss Robinson?”

Poirot beamed kindly on me.

“It is that I have arranged you a marriage, Hastings.”

“But, I say—”

“Bah!” said Poirot, giving me a friendly push over the threshold of the
door. “Do you think I wish to trumpet aloud in Merlinville the name of
Duveen?”

It was indeed Cinderella who rose to greet us. I took her hands in both
of mine. My eyes said the rest.

Poirot cleared his throat.

“_Mes enfants___,” he said, “for the moment we have no time for
sentiment. There is work ahead of us. Mademoiselle, were you able to do
what I asked you?”

In response, Cinderella took from her bag an object wrapped up in
paper, and handed it silently to Poirot. The latter unwrapped it. I
gave a start—for it was the aeroplane dagger which I understood she had
cast into the sea. Strange, how reluctant women always are to destroy
the most compromising of objects and documents!

“_Très bien, mon enfant___,” said Poirot. “I am pleased with you. Go
now and rest yourself. Hastings here and I have work to do. You shall
see him tomorrow.”

“Where are you going?” asked the girl, her eyes widening.

“You shall hear all about it tomorrow.”

“Because wherever you’re going, I’m coming too.”

“But mademoiselle—”

“I’m coming too, I tell you.”

Poirot realized that it was futile to argue further. He gave in.

“Come then, mademoiselle. But it will not be amusing. In all
probability nothing will happen.”

The girl made no reply.

Twenty minutes later we set forth. It was quite dark now, a close,
oppressive evening. Poirot led the way out of the town in the direction
of the Villa Geneviève. But when he reached the Villa Marguerite he
paused.

“I should like to assure myself that all goes well with Jack Renauld.
Come with me, Hastings. Mademoiselle will perhaps remain outside.
Madame Daubreuil might say something which would wound her.”

We unlatched the gate, and walked up the path. As we went round to the
side of the house, I drew Poirot’s attention to a window on the first
floor. Thrown sharply on the blind was the profile of Marthe Daubreuil.

“Ah!” said Poirot. “I figure to myself that that is the room where we
shall find Jack Renauld.”

Madame Daubreuil opened the door to us. She explained that Jack was
much the same, but perhaps we would like to see for ourselves. She led
us upstairs and into the bedroom. Marthe Daubreuil was embroidering by
a table with a lamp on it. She put her finger to her lips as we
entered.

Jack Renauld was sleeping an uneasy fitful sleep, his head turning from
side to side, and his face still unduly flushed.

“Is the doctor coming again?” asked Poirot in a whisper.

“Not unless we send. He is sleeping—that is the great thing. _Maman___
made him a tisane.”

She sat down again with her embroidery as we left the room. Madame
Daubreuil accompanied us down the stairs. Since I had learned of her
past history, I viewed this woman with increased interest. She stood
there with her eyes cast down, the same very faint enigmatical smile
that I remembered on her lips. And suddenly I felt afraid of her, as
one might feel afraid of a beautiful poisonous snake.

“I hope we have not deranged you, madame,” said Poirot politely as she
opened the door for us to pass out.

“Not at all, monsieur.”

“By the way,” said Poirot, as though struck by an afterthought, “M.
Stonor has not been in Merlinville today, has he?”

I could not at all fathom the point of this question which I well knew
to be meaningless as far as Poirot was concerned.

Madame Daubreuil replied quite composedly:

“Not that I know of.”

“He has not had an interview with Mrs. Renauld?”

“How should I know that, monsieur?”

“True,” said Poirot. “I thought you might have seen him coming or
going, that is all. Good night, madame.”

“Why—” I began.

“No ‘_whys___,’ Hastings. There will be time for that later.”

We rejoined Cinderella and made our way rapidly in the direction of the
Villa Geneviève. Poirot looked over his shoulder once at the lighted
window and the profile of Marthe as she bent over her work.

“He is being guarded at all events,” he muttered.

Arrived at the Villa Geneviève, Poirot took up his stand behind some
bushes to the left of the drive, where, whilst enjoying a good view
ourselves, we were completely hidden from sight. The Villa itself was
in total darkness, everybody was without doubt in bed and asleep. We
were almost immediately under the window of Mrs. Renauld’s bedroom,
which window, I noticed, was open. It seemed to me that it was upon
this spot that Poirot’s eyes were fixed.

“What are we going to do?” I whispered.

“Watch.”

“But—”

“I do not expect anything to happen for at least an hour, probably two
hours, but the—”

But his words were interrupted by a long thin drawn cry:

“Help!”

A light flashed up in the second floor room on the right hand side of
the house. The cry came from there. And even as we watched there came a
shadow on the blind as of two people struggling.

“_Mille tonnerres!___” cried Poirot. “She must have changed her room!”

Dashing forward, he battered wildly on the front door. Then rushing to
the tree in the flower-bed, he swarmed up it with the agility of a cat.
I followed him, as with a bound he sprang in through the open window.
Looking over my shoulder, I saw Dulcie reaching the branch behind me.

“Take care,” I exclaimed.

“Take care of your grandmother!” retorted the girl. “This is child’s
play to me.”

Poirot had rushed through the empty room and was pounding on the door
leading into the corridor.

“Locked and bolted on the outside,” he growled. “And it will take time
to burst it open.”

The cries for help were getting noticeably fainter. I saw despair in
Poirot’s eyes. He and I together put our shoulders to the door.

Cinderella’s voice, calm and dispassionate, came from the window:

“You’ll be too late, I guess I’m the only one who can do anything.”

Before I could move a hand to stop her, she appeared to leap upward
into space. I rushed and looked out. To my horror, I saw her hanging by
her hands from the roof, propelling herself along by jerks in the
direction of the lighted window.

“Good heavens! She’ll be killed,” I cried.

“You forget. She’s a professional acrobat, Hastings. It was the
providence of the good God that made her insist on coming with us
tonight. I only pray that she may be in time. Ah!”

A cry of absolute terror floated out on to the night as the girl
disappeared through the right-hand window; then in Cinderella’s clear
tones came the words:

“No, you don’t! I’ve got you—and my wrists are just like steel.”

At the same moment the door of our prison was opened cautiously by
Françoise. Poirot brushed her aside unceremoniously and rushed down the
passage to where the other maids were grouped round the further door.

“It’s locked on the inside, monsieur.”

There was the sound of a heavy fall within. After a moment or two the
key turned and the door swung slowly open. Cinderella, very pale,
beckoned us in.

“She is safe?” demanded Poirot.

“Yes, I was just in time. She was exhausted.”

Mrs. Renauld was half sitting, half lying on the bed. She was gasping
for breath.

“Nearly strangled me,” she murmured painfully. The girl picked up
something from the floor and handed it to Poirot. It was a rolled up
ladder of silk rope, very fine but quite strong.

“A getaway,” said Poirot. “By the window, whilst we were battering at
the door. Where is—the other?”

The girl stood aside a little and pointed. On the ground lay a figure
wrapped in some dark material a fold of which hid the face.

“Dead?”

She nodded.

“I think so.”

“Head must have struck the marble fender.”

“But who is it?” I cried.

“The murderer of M. Renauld, Hastings. And the would-be murderer of
Madame Renauld.”

Puzzled and uncomprehending, I knelt down, and lifting the fold of
cloth, looked into the dead beautiful face of Marthe Daubreuil!




28 Journey’s End

I have confused memories of the further events of that night. Poirot
seemed deaf to my repeated questions. He was engaged in overwhelming
Françoise with reproaches for not having told him of Mrs. Renauld’s
change of sleeping quarters.

I caught him by the shoulder, determined to attract his attention, and
make myself heard.

“But you _must___ have known,” I expostulated. “You were taken up to
see her this afternoon.”

Poirot deigned to attend to me for a brief moment.

“She had been wheeled on a sofa into the middle room—her boudoir,” he
explained.

“But, monsieur,” cried Françoise, “Madame changed her room almost
immediately after the crime! The associations—they were too
distressing!”

“Then why was I not told,” vociferated Poirot, striking the table, and
working himself into a first-class passion. “I demand
you—why—was—I—not—told? You are an old woman completely imbecile! And
Léonie and Denise are no better. All of you are triple idiots! Your
stupidity has nearly caused the death of your mistress. But for this
courageous child—”

He broke off, and, darting across the room to where the girl was
bending over ministering to Mrs. Renauld, he embraced her with Gallic
fervour—slightly to my annoyance.

I was aroused from my condition of mental fog by a sharp command from
Poirot to fetch the doctor immediately on Mrs. Renauld’s behalf. After
that, I might summon the police. And he added, to complete my dudgeon:

“It will hardly be worth your while to return here. I shall be too busy
to attend to you, and of Mademoiselle here I make a _garde-malad___.”

I retired with what dignity I could command. Having done my errands, I
returned to the hotel. I understood next to nothing of what had
occurred. The events of the night seemed fantastic and impossible.
Nobody would answer my questions. Nobody had seemed to hear them.
Angrily, I flung myself into bed, and slept the sleep of the bewildered
and utterly exhausted.

I awoke to find the sun pouring in through the open windows and Poirot,
neat and smiling, sitting beside the bed.

“_Enfin___ you wake! But it is that you are a famous sleeper, Hastings!
Do you know that it is nearly eleven o’clock?”

I groaned and put a hand to my head.

“I must have been dreaming,” I said. “Do you know, I actually dreamt
that we found Marthe Daubreuil’s body in Mrs. Renauld’s room, and that
you declared her to have murdered Mr. Renauld?”

“You were not dreaming. All that is quite true.”

“But Bella Duveen killed Mr. Renauld?”

“Oh, no, Hastings, she did not! She said she did—yes—but that was to
save the man she loved from the guillotine.”

“What?”

“Remember Jack Renauld’s story. They both arrived on the scene at the
same instant, and each took the other to be the perpetrator of the
crime. The girl stares at him in horror, and then with a cry rushes
away. But, when she hears that the crime has been brought home to him,
she cannot bear it, and comes forward to accuse herself and save him
from certain death.”

Poirot leaned back in his chair, and brought the tips of his fingers
together in familiar style.

“The case was not quite satisfactory to me,” he observed judicially.
“All along I was strongly under the impression that we were dealing
with a cold-blooded and premeditated crime committed by some one who
had been contented (very cleverly) with using M. Renauld’s own plans
for throwing the police off the track. The great criminal (as you may
remember my remarking to you once) is always supremely simple.”

I nodded.

“Now, to support this theory, the criminal must have been fully
cognizant of Mr. Renauld’s plans. That leads us to Madame Renauld. But
facts fail to support any theory of her guilt. Is there any one else
who might have known of them? Yes. From Marthe Daubreuil’s own lips we
have the admission that she overheard M. Renauld’s quarrel with the
tramp. If she could overhear that, there is no reason why she should
not have heard everything else, especially if M. and Madame Renauld
were imprudent enough to discuss their plans sitting on the bench.
Remember how easily you overheard Marthe’s conversation with Jack
Renauld from that spot.”

“But what possible motive could Marthe have for murdering Mr. Renauld?”
I argued.

“What motive? Money! M. Renauld was a millionaire several times over,
and at his death (or so she and Jack believed) half that vast fortune
would pass to his son. Let us reconstruct the scene from the standpoint
of Marthe Daubreuil.

“Marthe Daubreuil overhears what passes between Renauld and his wife.
So far he has been a nice little source of income to the Daubreuil
mother and daughter, but now he proposes to escape from their toils. At
first, possibly, her idea is to prevent that escape. But a bolder idea
takes its place, and one that fails to horrify the daughter of Jeanne
Beroldy! At present M. Renauld stands inexorably in the way of her
marriage with Jack. If the latter defies his father, he will be a
pauper—which is not at all to the mind of Mademoiselle Marthe. In fact,
I doubt if she has ever cared a straw for Jack Renauld. She can
simulate emotion, but in reality she is of the same cold, calculating
type as her mother. I doubt, too, whether she was really very sure of
her hold over the boy’s affections. She had dazzled and captivated him,
but separated from her, as his father could so easily manage to
separate him, she might lose him. But with M. Renauld dead, and Jack
the heir to half his millions, the marriage can take place at once, and
at a stroke she will attain wealth—not the beggarly thousands that have
been extracted from him so far. And her clever brain takes in the
simplicity of the thing. It is all so easy. M. Renauld is planning all
the circumstances of his death—she has only to step in at the right
moment and turn the farce into a grim reality. And here comes in the
second point which led me infallibly to Marthe Daubreuil—the dagger!
Jack Renauld had _three___ souvenirs made. One he gave to his mother,
one to Bella Duveen; was it not highly probable that he had given the
third one to Marthe Daubreuil?

“So then, to sum up, there were four points of note against Marthe
Daubreuil:

“(1) Marthe Daubreuil could have overheard M. Renauld’s plans.

“(2) Marthe Daubreuil had a direct interest in causing M. Renauld’s
death.

“(3) Marthe Daubreuil was the daughter of the notorious Madame Beroldy
who in my opinion was morally and virtually the murderess of her
husband, although it may have been Georges Conneau’s hand which struck
the actual blow.

“(4) Marthe Daubreuil was the only person, besides Jack Renauld, likely
to have the third dagger in her possession.”

Poirot paused and cleared his throat.

“Of course, when I learned of the existence of the other girl, Bella
Duveen, I realized that it was quite possible that _she___ might have
killed M. Renauld. The solution did not commend itself to me, because,
as I pointed out to you, Hastings, an expert, such as I am, likes to
meet a foeman worthy of his steel. Still one must take crimes as one
finds them, not as one would like them to be. It did not seem very
likely that Bella Duveen would be wandering about carrying a souvenir
paper-knife in her hand, but of course she might have had some idea all
the time of revenging herself on Jack Renauld. When she actually came
forward and confessed to the murder, it seemed that all was over. And
yet—I was not satisfied, _mon ami___. _I was not satisfied.…___

“I went over the case again minutely, and I came to the same conclusion
as before. If it was _not___ Bella Duveen, the only other person who
could have committed the crime was Marthe Daubreuil. But I had not one
single proof against her!

“And then you showed me that letter from Mademoiselle Dulcie, and I saw
a chance of settling the matter once for all. The original dagger was
stolen by Dulcie Duveen and thrown into the sea—since, as she thought,
it belonged to her sister. But if, by any chance, it was _not___ her
sister’s, but the one given by Jack to Marthe Daubreuil—why then, Bella
Duveen’s dagger would be still intact! I said no word to you, Hastings
(it was no time for romance) but I sought out Mademoiselle Dulcie, told
her as much as I deemed needful, and set her to search amongst the
effects of her sister. Imagine my elation, when she sought me out
(according to my instructions) as Miss Robinson with the precious
souvenir in her possession!

“In the meantime I had taken steps to force Mademoiselle Marthe into
the open. By my orders, Mrs. Renauld repulsed her son, and declared her
intention of making a will on the morrow which should cut him off from
ever enjoying even a portion of his father’s fortune. It was a
desperate step, but a necessary one, and Madame Renauld was fully
prepared to take the risk—though unfortunately she also never thought
of mentioning her change of room. I suppose she took it for granted
that I knew. All happened as I thought. Marthe Daubreuil made a last
bold bid for the Renauld millions—and failed!”

“What absolutely bewilders me,” I said, “is how she ever got into the
house without our seeing her. It seems an absolute miracle. We left her
behind at the Villa Marguerite, we go straight to the Villa
Geneviève—and yet she is there before us!”

“Ah, but we did not leave her behind. She was out of the Villa
Marguerite by the back way whilst we were talking to her mother in the
hall. That is where, as the Americans say, she ‘put it over’ on Hercule
Poirot!”

“But the shadow on the blind? We saw it from the road.”

“_Eh bien___, when we looked up, Madame Daubreuil had just had time to
run upstairs and take her place.”

“Madame Daubreuil?”

“Yes. One is old, and one is young, one dark, and one fair, but, for
the purpose of a silhouette on a blind, their profiles are singularly
alike. Even I did not suspect—triple imbecile that I was! I thought I
had plenty of time before me—that she would not try to gain admission
to the Villa until much later. She had brains, that beautiful
Mademoiselle Marthe.”

“And her object was to murder Mrs. Renauld?”

“Yes. The whole fortune would then pass to her son. But it would have
been suicide, _mon ami!___ On the floor by Marthe Daubreuil’s body, I
found a pad and a little bottle of chloroform and a hypodermic syringe
containing a fatal dose of morphine. You understand? The chloroform
first—then when the victim is unconscious the prick of the needle. By
the morning the smell of the chloroform has quite disappeared, and the
syringe lies where it has fallen from Madame Renauld’s hand. What would
he say, the excellent M. Hautet? ‘Poor woman! What did I tell you? The
shock of joy, it was too much on top of the rest! Did I not say that I
should not be surprised if her brain became unhinged. Altogether a most
tragic case, the Renauld Case!’

“However, Hastings, things did not go quite as Mademoiselle Marthe had
planned. To begin with, Madame Renauld was awake and waiting for her.
There is a struggle. But Madame Renauld is terribly weak still. There
is a last chance for Marthe Daubreuil. The idea of suicide is at an
end, but if she can silence Madame Renauld with her strong hands, make
a getaway with her little silk ladder whilst we are still battering on
the inside of the further door, and be back at the Villa Marguerite
before we return there, it will be hard to prove anything against her.
But she was checkmated—not by Hercule Poirot—but by _la petite
acrobate___ with her wrists of steel.”

I mused over the whole story.

“When did you first begin to suspect Marthe Daubreuil, Poirot? When she
told us she had overheard the quarrel in the garden?”

Poirot smiled.

“My friend, do you remember when we drove into Merlinville that first
day? And the beautiful girl we saw standing at the gate? You asked me
if I had not noticed a young goddess, and I replied to you that I had
seen only a girl with anxious eyes. That is how I have thought of
Marthe Daubreuil from the beginning. _The girl with the anxious
eyes!___ Why was she anxious? Not on Jack Renauld’s behalf, for she did
not know then that he had been in Merlinville the previous evening.”

“By the way,” I exclaimed, “how is Jack Renauld?”

“Much better. He is still at the Villa Marguerite. But Madame Daubreuil
has disappeared. The police are looking for her.”

“Was she in with her daughter, do you think?”

“We shall never know. Madame is a lady who can keep her secrets. And I
doubt very much if the police will ever find her.”

“Has Jack Renauld been—told?”

“Not yet.”

“It will be a terrible shock to him.”

“Naturally. And yet, do you know, Hastings, I doubt if his heart was
ever seriously engaged. So far we have looked upon Bella Duveen as a
siren, and Marthe Daubreuil as the girl he really loved. But I think
that if we reversed the terms we should come nearer to the truth.
Marthe Daubreuil was very beautiful. She set herself to fascinate Jack,
and she succeeded, but remember his curious reluctance to break with
the other girl. And see how he was willing to go to the guillotine
rather than implicate her. I have a little idea that when he learns the
truth he will be horrified—revolted, and his false love will wither
away.”

“What about Giraud?”

“He has a _crise___ of the nerves, that one! He has been obliged to
return to Paris.”

We both smiled.

Poirot proved a fairly true prophet. When at length the doctor
pronounced Jack Renauld strong enough to hear the truth, it was Poirot
who broke it to him. The shock was indeed terrific. Yet Jack rallied
better than I could have supposed possible. His mother’s devotion
helped him to live through those difficult days. The mother and son
were inseparable now.

There was a further revelation to come. Poirot had acquainted Mrs.
Renauld with the fact that he knew her secret, and had represented to
her that Jack should not be left in ignorance of his father’s past.

“To hide the truth, never does it avail, madame! Be brave and tell him
everything.”

With a heavy heart Mrs. Renauld consented, and her son learned that the
father he had loved had been in actual fact a fugitive from justice. A
halting question was promptly answered by Poirot.

“Reassure yourself, M. Jack. The world knows nothing. As far as I can
see, there is no obligation for me to take the police into my
confidence. Throughout the case I have acted, not for them, but for
your father. Justice overtook him at last, but no one need ever know
that he and Georges Conneau were one and the same.”

There were, of course, various points in the case that remained
puzzling to the police, but Poirot explained things in so plausible a
fashion that all query about them was gradually stilled.

Shortly after we got back to London, I noticed a magnificent model of a
foxhound adorning Poirot’s mantelpiece. In answer to my inquiring
glance, Poirot nodded.

“_Mais, oui!___ I got my 500 francs! Is he not a splendid fellow? I
call him Giraud!”

A few days later Jack Renauld came to see us with a resolute expression
on his face.

“M. Poirot, I’ve come to say good-bye. I’m sailing for South America
almost immediately. My father had large interests over the continent,
and I mean to start a new life out there.”

“You go alone, M. Jack?”

“My mother comes with me—and I shall keep Stonor on as my secretary. He
likes out of-the-way parts of the world.”

“No one else goes with you?”

Jack flushed.

“You mean—?”

“A girl who loves you very dearly—who has been willing to lay down her
life for you.”

“How could I ask her?” muttered the boy. “After all that has happened,
could I go to her and—oh, what sort of a lame story could I tell?”

“_Les femmes___—they have a wonderful genius for manufacturing crutches
for stories like that.”

“Yes, but—I’ve been such a damned fool!”

“So have all of us, at one time and another,” observed Poirot
philosophically.

But Jack’s face had hardened.

“There’s something else. I’m my father’s son. Would any one marry me,
knowing that?”

“You are your father’s son, you say. Hastings here will tell you that I
believe in heredity—”

“Well, then—”

“Wait. I know a woman, a woman of courage and endurance, capable of
great love, of supreme self-sacrifice—”

The boy looked up. His eyes softened.

“My mother!”

“Yes. You are your mother’s son as well as your father’s. Go then to
Mademoiselle Bella. Tell her everything. Keep nothing back—and see what
she will say!”

Jack looked irresolute.

“Go to her as a boy no longer, but a man—a man bowed by the fate of the
Past, and the fate of Today, but looking forward to a new and wonderful
life. Ask her to share it with you. You may not realize it, but your
love for each other has been tested in the fire and not found wanting.
You have both been willing to lay down your lives for each other.”

And what of Captain Arthur Hastings, humble chronicler of these pages?

There is some talk of his joining the Renaulds on a ranch across the
seas, but for the end of this story I prefer to go back to a morning in
the garden of the Villa Geneviève.

“I can’t call you Bella,” I said, “since it isn’t your name. And Dulcie
seems so unfamiliar. So it’s got to be Cinderella. Cinderella married
the Prince, you remember. I’m not a Prince, but—”

She interrupted me.

“Cinderella warned him, I’m sure! You see, she couldn’t promise to turn
into a princess. She was only a little scullion after all—”

“It’s the Prince’s turn to interrupt,” I interpolated. “Do you know
what he said?”

“No?”

“‘Hell!’ said the Prince—and kissed her!”

And I suited the action to the word.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MURDER ON THE LINKS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysterious Affair at Styles
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mysterious Affair at Styles

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: March 1, 1997 [eBook #863]
                Most recently updated: December 26, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Charles Keller


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIOUS AFFAIR AT STYLES ***




The Mysterious Affair at Styles

by Agatha Christie

Contents


CHAPTER I. I GO TO STYLES
CHAPTER II. THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY
CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY
CHAPTER IV. POIROT INVESTIGATES
CHAPTER V. “IT ISN’T STRYCHNINE, IS IT?”
CHAPTER VI. THE INQUEST
CHAPTER VII. POIROT PAYS HIS DEBTS
CHAPTER VIII. FRESH SUSPICIONS
CHAPTER IX. DR. BAUERSTEIN
CHAPTER X. THE ARREST
CHAPTER XI. THE CASE FOR THE PROSECUTION
CHAPTER XII. THE LAST LINK
CHAPTER XIII. POIROT EXPLAINS




CHAPTER I.
I GO TO STYLES


The intense interest aroused in the public by what was known at the
time as “The Styles Case” has now somewhat subsided. Nevertheless, in
view of the world-wide notoriety which attended it, I have been asked,
both by my friend Poirot and the family themselves, to write an account
of the whole story. This, we trust, will effectually silence the
sensational rumours which still persist.

I will therefore briefly set down the circumstances which led to my
being connected with the affair.

I had been invalided home from the Front; and, after spending some
months in a rather depressing Convalescent Home, was given a month’s
sick leave. Having no near relations or friends, I was trying to make
up my mind what to do, when I ran across John Cavendish. I had seen
very little of him for some years. Indeed, I had never known him
particularly well. He was a good fifteen years my senior, for one
thing, though he hardly looked his forty-five years. As a boy, though,
I had often stayed at Styles, his mother’s place in Essex.

We had a good yarn about old times, and it ended in his inviting me
down to Styles to spend my leave there.

“The mater will be delighted to see you again—after all those years,”
he added.

“Your mother keeps well?” I asked.

“Oh, yes. I suppose you know that she has married again?”

I am afraid I showed my surprise rather plainly. Mrs. Cavendish, who
had married John’s father when he was a widower with two sons, had been
a handsome woman of middle-age as I remembered her. She certainly could
not be a day less than seventy now. I recalled her as an energetic,
autocratic personality, somewhat inclined to charitable and social
notoriety, with a fondness for opening bazaars and playing the Lady
Bountiful. She was a most generous woman, and possessed a considerable
fortune of her own.

Their country-place, Styles Court, had been purchased by Mr. Cavendish
early in their married life. He had been completely under his wife’s
ascendancy, so much so that, on dying, he left the place to her for her
lifetime, as well as the larger part of his income; an arrangement that
was distinctly unfair to his two sons. Their step-mother, however, had
always been most generous to them; indeed, they were so young at the
time of their father’s remarriage that they always thought of her as
their own mother.

Lawrence, the younger, had been a delicate youth. He had qualified as a
doctor but early relinquished the profession of medicine, and lived at
home while pursuing literary ambitions; though his verses never had any
marked success.

John practised for some time as a barrister, but had finally settled
down to the more congenial life of a country squire. He had married two
years ago, and had taken his wife to live at Styles, though I
entertained a shrewd suspicion that he would have preferred his mother
to increase his allowance, which would have enabled him to have a home
of his own. Mrs. Cavendish, however, was a lady who liked to make her
own plans, and expected other people to fall in with them, and in this
case she certainly had the whip hand, namely: the purse strings.

John noticed my surprise at the news of his mother’s remarriage and
smiled rather ruefully.

“Rotten little bounder too!” he said savagely. “I can tell you,
Hastings, it’s making life jolly difficult for us. As for Evie—you
remember Evie?”

“No.”

“Oh, I suppose she was after your time. She’s the mater’s factotum,
companion, Jack of all trades! A great sport—old Evie! Not precisely
young and beautiful, but as game as they make them.”

“You were going to say——?”

“Oh, this fellow! He turned up from nowhere, on the pretext of being a
second cousin or something of Evie’s, though she didn’t seem
particularly keen to acknowledge the relationship. The fellow is an
absolute outsider, anyone can see that. He’s got a great black beard,
and wears patent leather boots in all weathers! But the mater cottoned
to him at once, took him on as secretary—you know how she’s always
running a hundred societies?”

I nodded.

“Well, of course the war has turned the hundreds into thousands. No
doubt the fellow was very useful to her. But you could have knocked us
all down with a feather when, three months ago, she suddenly announced
that she and Alfred were engaged! The fellow must be at least twenty
years younger than she is! It’s simply bare-faced fortune hunting; but
there you are—she is her own mistress, and she’s married him.”

“It must be a difficult situation for you all.”

“Difficult! It’s damnable!”

Thus it came about that, three days later, I descended from the train
at Styles St. Mary, an absurd little station, with no apparent reason
for existence, perched up in the midst of green fields and country
lanes. John Cavendish was waiting on the platform, and piloted me out
to the car.

“Got a drop or two of petrol still, you see,” he remarked. “Mainly
owing to the mater’s activities.”

The village of Styles St. Mary was situated about two miles from the
little station, and Styles Court lay a mile the other side of it. It
was a still, warm day in early July. As one looked out over the flat
Essex country, lying so green and peaceful under the afternoon sun, it
seemed almost impossible to believe that, not so very far away, a great
war was running its appointed course. I felt I had suddenly strayed
into another world. As we turned in at the lodge gates, John said:

“I’m afraid you’ll find it very quiet down here, Hastings.”

“My dear fellow, that’s just what I want.”

“Oh, it’s pleasant enough if you want to lead the idle life. I drill
with the volunteers twice a week, and lend a hand at the farms. My wife
works regularly ‘on the land’. She is up at five every morning to milk,
and keeps at it steadily until lunchtime. It’s a jolly good life taking
it all round—if it weren’t for that fellow Alfred Inglethorp!” He
checked the car suddenly, and glanced at his watch. “I wonder if we’ve
time to pick up Cynthia. No, she’ll have started from the hospital by
now.”

“Cynthia! That’s not your wife?”

“No, Cynthia is a protégée of my mother’s, the daughter of an old
schoolfellow of hers, who married a rascally solicitor. He came a
cropper, and the girl was left an orphan and penniless. My mother came
to the rescue, and Cynthia has been with us nearly two years now. She
works in the Red Cross Hospital at Tadminster, seven miles away.”

As he spoke the last words, we drew up in front of the fine old house.
A lady in a stout tweed skirt, who was bending over a flower bed,
straightened herself at our approach.

“Hullo, Evie, here’s our wounded hero! Mr. Hastings—Miss Howard.”

Miss Howard shook hands with a hearty, almost painful, grip. I had an
impression of very blue eyes in a sunburnt face. She was a
pleasant-looking woman of about forty, with a deep voice, almost manly
in its stentorian tones, and had a large sensible square body, with
feet to match—these last encased in good thick boots. Her conversation,
I soon found, was couched in the telegraphic style.

“Weeds grow like house afire. Can’t keep even with ’em. Shall press you
in. Better be careful.”

“I’m sure I shall be only too delighted to make myself useful,” I
responded.

“Don’t say it. Never does. Wish you hadn’t later.”

“You’re a cynic, Evie,” said John, laughing. “Where’s tea to-day—inside
or out?”

“Out. Too fine a day to be cooped up in the house.”

“Come on then, you’ve done enough gardening for to-day. ‘The labourer
is worthy of his hire’, you know. Come and be refreshed.”

“Well,” said Miss Howard, drawing off her gardening gloves, “I’m
inclined to agree with you.”

She led the way round the house to where tea was spread under the shade
of a large sycamore.

A figure rose from one of the basket chairs, and came a few steps to
meet us.

“My wife, Hastings,” said John.

I shall never forget my first sight of Mary Cavendish. Her tall,
slender form, outlined against the bright light; the vivid sense of
slumbering fire that seemed to find expression only in those wonderful
tawny eyes of hers, remarkable eyes, different from any other woman’s
that I have ever known; the intense power of stillness she possessed,
which nevertheless conveyed the impression of a wild untamed spirit in
an exquisitely civilised body—all these things are burnt into my
memory. I shall never forget them.

She greeted me with a few words of pleasant welcome in a low clear
voice, and I sank into a basket chair feeling distinctly glad that I
had accepted John’s invitation. Mrs. Cavendish gave me some tea, and
her few quiet remarks heightened my first impression of her as a
thoroughly fascinating woman. An appreciative listener is always
stimulating, and I described, in a humorous manner, certain incidents
of my Convalescent Home, in a way which, I flatter myself, greatly
amused my hostess. John, of course, good fellow though he is, could
hardly be called a brilliant conversationalist.

At that moment a well remembered voice floated through the open French
window near at hand:

“Then you’ll write to the Princess after tea, Alfred? I’ll write to
Lady Tadminster for the second day, myself. Or shall we wait until we
hear from the Princess? In case of a refusal, Lady Tadminster might
open it the first day, and Mrs. Crosbie the second. Then there’s the
Duchess—about the school fête.”

There was the murmur of a man’s voice, and then Mrs. Inglethorp’s rose
in reply:

“Yes, certainly. After tea will do quite well. You are so thoughtful,
Alfred dear.”

The French window swung open a little wider, and a handsome
white-haired old lady, with a somewhat masterful cast of features,
stepped out of it on to the lawn. A man followed her, a suggestion of
deference in his manner.

Mrs. Inglethorp greeted me with effusion.

“Why, if it isn’t too delightful to see you again, Mr. Hastings, after
all these years. Alfred, darling, Mr. Hastings—my husband.”

I looked with some curiosity at “Alfred darling”. He certainly struck a
rather alien note. I did not wonder at John objecting to his beard. It
was one of the longest and blackest I have ever seen. He wore
gold-rimmed pince-nez, and had a curious impassivity of feature. It
struck me that he might look natural on a stage, but was strangely out
of place in real life. His voice was rather deep and unctuous. He
placed a wooden hand in mine and said:

“This is a pleasure, Mr. Hastings.” Then, turning to his wife: “Emily
dearest, I think that cushion is a little damp.”

She beamed fondly on him, as he substituted another with every
demonstration of the tenderest care. Strange infatuation of an
otherwise sensible woman!

With the presence of Mr. Inglethorp, a sense of constraint and veiled
hostility seemed to settle down upon the company. Miss Howard, in
particular, took no pains to conceal her feelings. Mrs. Inglethorp,
however, seemed to notice nothing unusual. Her volubility, which I
remembered of old, had lost nothing in the intervening years, and she
poured out a steady flood of conversation, mainly on the subject of the
forthcoming bazaar which she was organizing and which was to take place
shortly. Occasionally she referred to her husband over a question of
days or dates. His watchful and attentive manner never varied. From the
very first I took a firm and rooted dislike to him, and I flatter
myself that my first judgments are usually fairly shrewd.

Presently Mrs. Inglethorp turned to give some instructions about
letters to Evelyn Howard, and her husband addressed me in his
painstaking voice:

“Is soldiering your regular profession, Mr. Hastings?”

“No, before the war I was in Lloyd’s.”

“And you will return there after it is over?”

“Perhaps. Either that or a fresh start altogether.”

Mary Cavendish leant forward.

“What would you really choose as a profession, if you could just
consult your inclination?”

“Well, that depends.”

“No secret hobby?” she asked. “Tell me—you’re drawn to something?
Everyone is—usually something absurd.”

“You’ll laugh at me.”

She smiled.

“Perhaps.”

“Well, I’ve always had a secret hankering to be a detective!”

“The real thing—Scotland Yard? Or Sherlock Holmes?”

“Oh, Sherlock Holmes by all means. But really, seriously, I am awfully
drawn to it. I came across a man in Belgium once, a very famous
detective, and he quite inflamed me. He was a marvellous little fellow.
He used to say that all good detective work was a mere matter of
method. My system is based on his—though of course I have progressed
rather further. He was a funny little man, a great dandy, but
wonderfully clever.”

“Like a good detective story myself,” remarked Miss Howard. “Lots of
nonsense written, though. Criminal discovered in last chapter. Everyone
dumbfounded. Real crime—you’d know at once.”

“There have been a great number of undiscovered crimes,” I argued.

“Don’t mean the police, but the people that are right in it. The
family. You couldn’t really hoodwink them. They’d know.”

“Then,” I said, much amused, “you think that if you were mixed up in a
crime, say a murder, you’d be able to spot the murderer right off?”

“Of course I should. Mightn’t be able to prove it to a pack of lawyers.
But I’m certain I’d know. I’d feel it in my fingertips if he came near
me.”

“It might be a ‘she’,” I suggested.

“Might. But murder’s a violent crime. Associate it more with a man.”

“Not in a case of poisoning.” Mrs. Cavendish’s clear voice startled me.
“Dr. Bauerstein was saying yesterday that, owing to the general
ignorance of the more uncommon poisons among the medical profession,
there were probably countless cases of poisoning quite unsuspected.”

“Why, Mary, what a gruesome conversation!” cried Mrs. Inglethorp. “It
makes me feel as if a goose were walking over my grave. Oh, there’s
Cynthia!”

A young girl in V.A.D. uniform ran lightly across the lawn.

“Why, Cynthia, you are late to-day. This is Mr. Hastings—Miss Murdoch.”

Cynthia Murdoch was a fresh-looking young creature, full of life and
vigour. She tossed off her little V.A.D. cap, and I admired the great
loose waves of her auburn hair, and the smallness and whiteness of the
hand she held out to claim her tea. With dark eyes and eyelashes she
would have been a beauty.

She flung herself down on the ground beside John, and as I handed her a
plate of sandwiches she smiled up at me.

“Sit down here on the grass, do. It’s ever so much nicer.”

I dropped down obediently.

“You work at Tadminster, don’t you, Miss Murdoch?”

She nodded.

“For my sins.”

“Do they bully you, then?” I asked, smiling.

“I should like to see them!” cried Cynthia with dignity.

“I have got a cousin who is nursing,” I remarked. “And she is terrified
of ‘Sisters’.”

“I don’t wonder. Sisters _are_, you know, Mr. Hastings. They simp-ly
_are_! You’ve no idea! But I’m not a nurse, thank heaven, I work in the
dispensary.”

“How many people do you poison?” I asked, smiling.

Cynthia smiled too.

“Oh, hundreds!” she said.

“Cynthia,” called Mrs. Inglethorp, “do you think you could write a few
notes for me?”

“Certainly, Aunt Emily.”

She jumped up promptly, and something in her manner reminded me that
her position was a dependent one, and that Mrs. Inglethorp, kind as she
might be in the main, did not allow her to forget it.

My hostess turned to me.

“John will show you your room. Supper is at half-past seven. We have
given up late dinner for some time now. Lady Tadminster, our Member’s
wife—she was the late Lord Abbotsbury’s daughter—does the same. She
agrees with me that one must set an example of economy. We are quite a
war household; nothing is wasted here—every scrap of waste paper, even,
is saved and sent away in sacks.”

I expressed my appreciation, and John took me into the house and up the
broad staircase, which forked right and left half-way to different
wings of the building. My room was in the left wing, and looked out
over the park.

John left me, and a few minutes later I saw him from my window walking
slowly across the grass arm in arm with Cynthia Murdoch. I heard Mrs.
Inglethorp call “Cynthia” impatiently, and the girl started and ran
back to the house. At the same moment, a man stepped out from the
shadow of a tree and walked slowly in the same direction. He looked
about forty, very dark with a melancholy clean-shaven face. Some
violent emotion seemed to be mastering him. He looked up at my window
as he passed, and I recognized him, though he had changed much in the
fifteen years that had elapsed since we last met. It was John’s younger
brother, Lawrence Cavendish. I wondered what it was that had brought
that singular expression to his face.

Then I dismissed him from my mind, and returned to the contemplation of
my own affairs.

The evening passed pleasantly enough; and I dreamed that night of that
enigmatical woman, Mary Cavendish.

The next morning dawned bright and sunny, and I was full of the
anticipation of a delightful visit.

I did not see Mrs. Cavendish until lunch-time, when she volunteered to
take me for a walk, and we spent a charming afternoon roaming in the
woods, returning to the house about five.

As we entered the large hall, John beckoned us both into the
smoking-room. I saw at once by his face that something disturbing had
occurred. We followed him in, and he shut the door after us.

“Look here, Mary, there’s the deuce of a mess. Evie’s had a row with
Alfred Inglethorp, and she’s off.”

“Evie? Off?”

John nodded gloomily.

“Yes; you see she went to the mater, and—Oh,—here’s Evie herself.”

Miss Howard entered. Her lips were set grimly together, and she carried
a small suit-case. She looked excited and determined, and slightly on
the defensive.

“At any rate,” she burst out, “I’ve spoken my mind!”

“My dear Evelyn,” cried Mrs. Cavendish, “this can’t be true!”

Miss Howard nodded grimly.

“True enough! Afraid I said some things to Emily she won’t forget or
forgive in a hurry. Don’t mind if they’ve only sunk in a bit. Probably
water off a duck’s back, though. I said right out: ‘You’re an old
woman, Emily, and there’s no fool like an old fool. The man’s twenty
years younger than you, and don’t you fool yourself as to what he
married you for. Money! Well, don’t let him have too much of it. Farmer
Raikes has got a very pretty young wife. Just ask your Alfred how much
time he spends over there.’ She was very angry. Natural! I went on,
‘I’m going to warn you, whether you like it or not. That man would as
soon murder you in your bed as look at you. He’s a bad lot. You can say
what you like to me, but remember what I’ve told you. He’s a bad lot!’”

“What did she say?”

Miss Howard made an extremely expressive grimace.

“‘Darling Alfred’—‘dearest Alfred’—‘wicked calumnies’ —‘wicked
lies’—‘wicked woman’—to accuse her ‘dear husband!’ The sooner I left
her house the better. So I’m off.”

“But not now?”

“This minute!”

For a moment we sat and stared at her. Finally John Cavendish, finding
his persuasions of no avail, went off to look up the trains. His wife
followed him, murmuring something about persuading Mrs. Inglethorp to
think better of it.

As she left the room, Miss Howard’s face changed. She leant towards me
eagerly.

“Mr. Hastings, you’re honest. I can trust you?”

I was a little startled. She laid her hand on my arm, and sank her
voice to a whisper.

“Look after her, Mr. Hastings. My poor Emily. They’re a lot of
sharks—all of them. Oh, I know what I’m talking about. There isn’t one
of them that’s not hard up and trying to get money out of her. I’ve
protected her as much as I could. Now I’m out of the way, they’ll
impose upon her.”

“Of course, Miss Howard,” I said, “I’ll do everything I can, but I’m
sure you’re excited and overwrought.”

She interrupted me by slowly shaking her forefinger.

“Young man, trust me. I’ve lived in the world rather longer than you
have. All I ask you is to keep your eyes open. You’ll see what I mean.”

The throb of the motor came through the open window, and Miss Howard
rose and moved to the door. John’s voice sounded outside. With her hand
on the handle, she turned her head over her shoulder, and beckoned to
me.

“Above all, Mr. Hastings, watch that devil—her husband!”

There was no time for more. Miss Howard was swallowed up in an eager
chorus of protests and good-byes. The Inglethorps did not appear.

As the motor drove away, Mrs. Cavendish suddenly detached herself from
the group, and moved across the drive to the lawn to meet a tall
bearded man who had been evidently making for the house. The colour
rose in her cheeks as she held out her hand to him.

“Who is that?” I asked sharply, for instinctively I distrusted the man.

“That’s Dr. Bauerstein,” said John shortly.

“And who is Dr. Bauerstein?”

“He’s staying in the village doing a rest cure, after a bad nervous
breakdown. He’s a London specialist; a very clever man—one of the
greatest living experts on poisons, I believe.”

“And he’s a great friend of Mary’s,” put in Cynthia, the irrepressible.

John Cavendish frowned and changed the subject.

“Come for a stroll, Hastings. This has been a most rotten business. She
always had a rough tongue, but there is no stauncher friend in England
than Evelyn Howard.”

He took the path through the plantation, and we walked down to the
village through the woods which bordered one side of the estate.

As we passed through one of the gates on our way home again, a pretty
young woman of gipsy type coming in the opposite direction bowed and
smiled.

“That’s a pretty girl,” I remarked appreciatively.

John’s face hardened.

“That is Mrs. Raikes.”

“The one that Miss Howard——”

“Exactly,” said John, with rather unnecessary abruptness.

I thought of the white-haired old lady in the big house, and that vivid
wicked little face that had just smiled into ours, and a vague chill of
foreboding crept over me. I brushed it aside.

“Styles is really a glorious old place,” I said to John.

He nodded rather gloomily.

“Yes, it’s a fine property. It’ll be mine some day—should be mine now
by rights, if my father had only made a decent will. And then I
shouldn’t be so damned hard up as I am now.”

“Hard up, are you?”

“My dear Hastings, I don’t mind telling you that I’m at my wits’ end
for money.”

“Couldn’t your brother help you?”

“Lawrence? He’s gone through every penny he ever had, publishing rotten
verses in fancy bindings. No, we’re an impecunious lot. My mother’s
always been awfully good to us, I must say. That is, up to now. Since
her marriage, of course——” he broke off, frowning.

For the first time I felt that, with Evelyn Howard, something
indefinable had gone from the atmosphere. Her presence had spelt
security. Now that security was removed—and the air seemed rife with
suspicion. The sinister face of Dr. Bauerstein recurred to me
unpleasantly. A vague suspicion of everyone and everything filled my
mind. Just for a moment I had a premonition of approaching evil.




CHAPTER II.
THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY


I had arrived at Styles on the 5th of July. I come now to the events of
the 16th and 17th of that month. For the convenience of the reader I
will recapitulate the incidents of those days in as exact a manner as
possible. They were elicited subsequently at the trial by a process of
long and tedious cross-examinations.

I received a letter from Evelyn Howard a couple of days after her
departure, telling me she was working as a nurse at the big hospital in
Middlingham, a manufacturing town some fifteen miles away, and begging
me to let her know if Mrs. Inglethorp should show any wish to be
reconciled.

The only fly in the ointment of my peaceful days was Mrs. Cavendish’s
extraordinary, and, for my part, unaccountable preference for the
society of Dr. Bauerstein. What she saw in the man I cannot imagine,
but she was always asking him up to the house, and often went off for
long expeditions with him. I must confess that I was quite unable to
see his attraction.

The 16th of July fell on a Monday. It was a day of turmoil. The famous
bazaar had taken place on Saturday, and an entertainment, in connection
with the same charity, at which Mrs. Inglethorp was to recite a War
poem, was to be held that night. We were all busy during the morning
arranging and decorating the Hall in the village where it was to take
place. We had a late luncheon and spent the afternoon resting in the
garden. I noticed that John’s manner was somewhat unusual. He seemed
very excited and restless.

After tea, Mrs. Inglethorp went to lie down to rest before her efforts
in the evening and I challenged Mary Cavendish to a single at tennis.

About a quarter to seven, Mrs. Inglethorp called us that we should be
late as supper was early that night. We had rather a scramble to get
ready in time; and before the meal was over the motor was waiting at
the door.

The entertainment was a great success, Mrs. Inglethorp’s recitation
receiving tremendous applause. There were also some tableaux in which
Cynthia took part. She did not return with us, having been asked to a
supper party, and to remain the night with some friends who had been
acting with her in the tableaux.

The following morning, Mrs. Inglethorp stayed in bed to breakfast, as
she was rather overtired; but she appeared in her briskest mood about
12.30, and swept Lawrence and myself off to a luncheon party.

“Such a charming invitation from Mrs. Rolleston. Lady Tadminster’s
sister, you know. The Rollestons came over with the Conqueror—one of
our oldest families.”

Mary had excused herself on the plea of an engagement with Dr.
Bauerstein.

We had a pleasant luncheon, and as we drove away Lawrence suggested
that we should return by Tadminster, which was barely a mile out of our
way, and pay a visit to Cynthia in her dispensary. Mrs. Inglethorp
replied that this was an excellent idea, but as she had several letters
to write she would drop us there, and we could come back with Cynthia
in the pony-trap.

We were detained under suspicion by the hospital porter, until Cynthia
appeared to vouch for us, looking very cool and sweet in her long white
overall. She took us up to her sanctum, and introduced us to her fellow
dispenser, a rather awe-inspiring individual, whom Cynthia cheerily
addressed as “Nibs.”

“What a lot of bottles!” I exclaimed, as my eye travelled round the
small room. “Do you really know what’s in them all?”

“Say something original,” groaned Cynthia. “Every single person who
comes up here says that. We are really thinking of bestowing a prize on
the first individual who does _not_ say: ‘What a lot of bottles!’ And I
know the next thing you’re going to say is: ‘How many people have you
poisoned?’”

I pleaded guilty with a laugh.

“If you people only knew how fatally easy it is to poison someone by
mistake, you wouldn’t joke about it. Come on, let’s have tea. We’ve got
all sorts of secret stores in that cupboard. No, Lawrence—that’s the
poison cupboard. The big cupboard—that’s right.”

We had a very cheery tea, and assisted Cynthia to wash up afterwards.
We had just put away the last tea-spoon when a knock came at the door.
The countenances of Cynthia and Nibs were suddenly petrified into a
stern and forbidding expression.

“Come in,” said Cynthia, in a sharp professional tone.

A young and rather scared looking nurse appeared with a bottle which
she proffered to Nibs, who waved her towards Cynthia with the somewhat
enigmatical remark:

“_I_’m not really here to-day.”

Cynthia took the bottle and examined it with the severity of a judge.

“This should have been sent up this morning.”

“Sister is very sorry. She forgot.”

“Sister should read the rules outside the door.”

I gathered from the little nurse’s expression that there was not the
least likelihood of her having the hardihood to retail this message to
the dreaded “Sister”.

“So now it can’t be done until to-morrow,” finished Cynthia.

“Don’t you think you could possibly let us have it to-night?”

“Well,” said Cynthia graciously, “we are very busy, but if we have time
it shall be done.”

The little nurse withdrew, and Cynthia promptly took a jar from the
shelf, refilled the bottle, and placed it on the table outside the
door.

I laughed.

“Discipline must be maintained?”

“Exactly. Come out on our little balcony. You can see all the outside
wards there.”

I followed Cynthia and her friend and they pointed out the different
wards to me. Lawrence remained behind, but after a few moments Cynthia
called to him over her shoulder to come and join us. Then she looked at
her watch.

“Nothing more to do, Nibs?”

“No.”

“All right. Then we can lock up and go.”

I had seen Lawrence in quite a different light that afternoon. Compared
to John, he was an astoundingly difficult person to get to know. He was
the opposite of his brother in almost every respect, being unusually
shy and reserved. Yet he had a certain charm of manner, and I fancied
that, if one really knew him well, one could have a deep affection for
him. I had always fancied that his manner to Cynthia was rather
constrained, and that she on her side was inclined to be shy of him.
But they were both gay enough this afternoon, and chatted together like
a couple of children.

As we drove through the village, I remembered that I wanted some
stamps, so accordingly we pulled up at the post office.

As I came out again, I cannoned into a little man who was just
entering. I drew aside and apologised, when suddenly, with a loud
exclamation, he clasped me in his arms and kissed me warmly.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried. “It is indeed _mon ami_ Hastings!”

“Poirot!” I exclaimed.

I turned to the pony-trap.

“This is a very pleasant meeting for me, Miss Cynthia. This is my old
friend, Monsieur Poirot, whom I have not seen for years.”

“Oh, we know Monsieur Poirot,” said Cynthia gaily. “But I had no idea
he was a friend of yours.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Poirot seriously. “I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. It
is by the charity of that good Mrs. Inglethorp that I am here.” Then,
as I looked at him inquiringly: “Yes, my friend, she had kindly
extended hospitality to seven of my countrypeople who, alas, are
refugees from their native land. We Belgians will always remember her
with gratitude.”

Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than
five feet, four inches, but carried himself with great dignity. His
head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little
on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness of
his attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would have
caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified
little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his
time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As a
detective, his _flair_ had been extraordinary, and he had achieved
triumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.

He pointed out to me the little house inhabited by him and his fellow
Belgians, and I promised to go and see him at an early date. Then he
raised his hat with a flourish to Cynthia, and we drove away.

“He’s a dear little man,” said Cynthia. “I’d no idea you knew him.”

“You’ve been entertaining a celebrity unawares,” I replied.

And, for the rest of the way home, I recited to them the various
exploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.

We arrived back in a very cheerful mood. As we entered the hall, Mrs.
Inglethorp came out of her boudoir. She looked flushed and upset.

“Oh, it’s you,” she said.

“Is there anything the matter, Aunt Emily?” asked Cynthia.

“Certainly not,” said Mrs. Inglethorp sharply. “What should there be?”
Then catching sight of Dorcas, the parlourmaid, going into the
dining-room, she called to her to bring some stamps into the boudoir.

“Yes, m’m.” The old servant hesitated, then added diffidently: “Don’t
you think, m’m, you’d better get to bed? You’re looking very tired.”

“Perhaps you’re right, Dorcas—yes—no—not now. I’ve some letters I must
finish by post-time. Have you lighted the fire in my room as I told
you?”

“Yes, m’m.”

“Then I’ll go to bed directly after supper.”

She went into the boudoir again, and Cynthia stared after her.

“Goodness gracious! I wonder what’s up?” she said to Lawrence.

He did not seem to have heard her, for without a word he turned on his
heel and went out of the house.

I suggested a quick game of tennis before supper and, Cynthia agreeing,
I ran upstairs to fetch my racquet.

Mrs. Cavendish was coming down the stairs. It may have been my fancy,
but she, too, was looking odd and disturbed.

“Had a good walk with Dr. Bauerstein?” I asked, trying to appear as
indifferent as I could.

“I didn’t go,” she replied abruptly. “Where is Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“In the boudoir.”

Her hand clenched itself on the banisters, then she seemed to nerve
herself for some encounter, and went rapidly past me down the stairs
across the hall to the boudoir, the door of which she shut behind her.

As I ran out to the tennis court a few moments later, I had to pass the
open boudoir window, and was unable to help overhearing the following
scrap of dialogue. Mary Cavendish was saying in the voice of a woman
desperately controlling herself:

“Then you won’t show it to me?”

To which Mrs. Inglethorp replied:

“My dear Mary, it has nothing to do with that matter.”

“Then show it to me.”

“I tell you it is not what you imagine. It does not concern you in the
least.”

To which Mary Cavendish replied, with a rising bitterness:

“Of course, I might have known you would shield him.”

Cynthia was waiting for me, and greeted me eagerly with:

“I say! There’s been the most awful row! I’ve got it all out of
Dorcas.”

“What kind of a row?”

“Between Aunt Emily and _him_. I do hope she’s found him out at last!”

“Was Dorcas there, then?”

“Of course not. She ‘happened to be near the door’. It was a real old
bust-up. I do wish I knew what it was all about.”

I thought of Mrs. Raikes’s gipsy face, and Evelyn Howard’s warnings,
but wisely decided to hold my peace, whilst Cynthia exhausted every
possible hypothesis, and cheerfully hoped, “Aunt Emily will send him
away, and will never speak to him again.”

I was anxious to get hold of John, but he was nowhere to be seen.
Evidently something very momentous had occurred that afternoon. I tried
to forget the few words I had overheard; but, do what I would, I could
not dismiss them altogether from my mind. What was Mary Cavendish’s
concern in the matter?

Mr. Inglethorp was in the drawing-room when I came down to supper. His
face was impassive as ever, and the strange unreality of the man struck
me afresh.

Mrs. Inglethorp came down last. She still looked agitated, and during
the meal there was a somewhat constrained silence. Inglethorp was
unusually quiet. As a rule, he surrounded his wife with little
attentions, placing a cushion at her back, and altogether playing the
part of the devoted husband. Immediately after supper, Mrs. Inglethorp
retired to her boudoir again.

“Send my coffee in here, Mary,” she called. “I’ve just five minutes to
catch the post.”

Cynthia and I went and sat by the open window in the drawing-room. Mary
Cavendish brought our coffee to us. She seemed excited.

“Do you young people want lights, or do you enjoy the twilight?” she
asked. “Will you take Mrs. Inglethorp her coffee, Cynthia? I will pour
it out.”

“Do not trouble, Mary,” said Inglethorp. “I will take it to Emily.” He
poured it out, and went out of the room carrying it carefully.

Lawrence followed him, and Mrs. Cavendish sat down by us.

We three sat for some time in silence. It was a glorious night, hot and
still. Mrs. Cavendish fanned herself gently with a palm leaf.

“It’s almost too hot,” she murmured. “We shall have a thunderstorm.”

Alas, that these harmonious moments can never endure! My paradise was
rudely shattered by the sound of a well known, and heartily disliked,
voice in the hall.

“Dr. Bauerstein!” exclaimed Cynthia. “What a funny time to come.”

I glanced jealously at Mary Cavendish, but she seemed quite
undisturbed, the delicate pallor of her cheeks did not vary.

In a few moments, Alfred Inglethorp had ushered the doctor in, the
latter laughing, and protesting that he was in no fit state for a
drawing-room. In truth, he presented a sorry spectacle, being literally
plastered with mud.

“What have you been doing, doctor?” cried Mrs. Cavendish.

“I must make my apologies,” said the doctor. “I did not really mean to
come in, but Mr. Inglethorp insisted.”

“Well, Bauerstein, you are in a plight,” said John, strolling in from
the hall. “Have some coffee, and tell us what you have been up to.”

“Thank you, I will.” He laughed rather ruefully, as he described how he
had discovered a very rare species of fern in an inaccessible place,
and in his efforts to obtain it had lost his footing, and slipped
ignominiously into a neighbouring pond.

“The sun soon dried me off,” he added, “but I’m afraid my appearance is
very disreputable.”

At this juncture, Mrs. Inglethorp called to Cynthia from the hall, and
the girl ran out.

“Just carry up my despatch-case, will you, dear? I’m going to bed.”

The door into the hall was a wide one. I had risen when Cynthia did,
John was close by me. There were therefore three witnesses who could
swear that Mrs. Inglethorp was carrying her coffee, as yet untasted, in
her hand.

My evening was utterly and entirely spoilt by the presence of Dr.
Bauerstein. It seemed to me the man would never go. He rose at last,
however, and I breathed a sigh of relief.

“I’ll walk down to the village with you,” said Mr. Inglethorp. “I must
see our agent over those estate accounts.” He turned to John. “No one
need sit up. I will take the latch-key.”




CHAPTER III.
THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY


To make this part of my story clear, I append the following plan of the
first floor of Styles. The servants’ rooms are reached through the door
B. They have no communication with the right wing, where the
Inglethorps’ rooms were situated.

[Illustration]

It seemed to be the middle of the night when I was awakened by Lawrence
Cavendish. He had a candle in his hand, and the agitation of his face
told me at once that something was seriously wrong.

“What’s the matter?” I asked, sitting up in bed, and trying to collect
my scattered thoughts.

“We are afraid my mother is very ill. She seems to be having some kind
of fit. Unfortunately she has locked herself in.”

“I’ll come at once.”

I sprang out of bed; and, pulling on a dressing-gown, followed Lawrence
along the passage and the gallery to the right wing of the house.

John Cavendish joined us, and one or two of the servants were standing
round in a state of awe-stricken excitement. Lawrence turned to his
brother.

“What do you think we had better do?”

Never, I thought, had his indecision of character been more apparent.

John rattled the handle of Mrs. Inglethorp’s door violently, but with
no effect. It was obviously locked or bolted on the inside. The whole
household was aroused by now. The most alarming sounds were audible
from the interior of the room. Clearly something must be done.

“Try going through Mr. Inglethorp’s room, sir,” cried Dorcas. “Oh, the
poor mistress!”

Suddenly I realized that Alfred Inglethorp was not with us—that he
alone had given no sign of his presence. John opened the door of his
room. It was pitch dark, but Lawrence was following with the candle,
and by its feeble light we saw that the bed had not been slept in, and
that there was no sign of the room having been occupied.

We went straight to the connecting door. That, too, was locked or
bolted on the inside. What was to be done?

“Oh, dear, sir,” cried Dorcas, wringing her hands, “what ever shall we
do?”

“We must try and break the door in, I suppose. It’ll be a tough job,
though. Here, let one of the maids go down and wake Baily and tell him
to go for Dr. Wilkins at once. Now then, we’ll have a try at the door.
Half a moment, though, isn’t there a door into Miss Cynthia’s rooms?”

“Yes, sir, but that’s always bolted. It’s never been undone.”

“Well, we might just see.”

He ran rapidly down the corridor to Cynthia’s room. Mary Cavendish was
there, shaking the girl—who must have been an unusually sound
sleeper—and trying to wake her.

In a moment or two he was back.

“No good. That’s bolted too. We must break in the door. I think this
one is a shade less solid than the one in the passage.”

We strained and heaved together. The framework of the door was solid,
and for a long time it resisted our efforts, but at last we felt it
give beneath our weight, and finally, with a resounding crash, it was
burst open.

We stumbled in together, Lawrence still holding his candle. Mrs.
Inglethorp was lying on the bed, her whole form agitated by violent
convulsions, in one of which she must have overturned the table beside
her. As we entered, however, her limbs relaxed, and she fell back upon
the pillows.

John strode across the room, and lit the gas. Turning to Annie, one of
the housemaids, he sent her downstairs to the dining-room for brandy.
Then he went across to his mother whilst I unbolted the door that gave
on the corridor.

I turned to Lawrence, to suggest that I had better leave them now that
there was no further need of my services, but the words were frozen on
my lips. Never have I seen such a ghastly look on any man’s face. He
was white as chalk, the candle he held in his shaking hand was
sputtering onto the carpet, and his eyes, petrified with terror, or
some such kindred emotion, stared fixedly over my head at a point on
the further wall. It was as though he had seen something that turned
him to stone. I instinctively followed the direction of his eyes, but I
could see nothing unusual. The still feebly flickering ashes in the
grate, and the row of prim ornaments on the mantelpiece, were surely
harmless enough.

The violence of Mrs. Inglethorp’s attack seemed to be passing. She was
able to speak in short gasps.

“Better now—very sudden—stupid of me—to lock myself in.”

A shadow fell on the bed and, looking up, I saw Mary Cavendish standing
near the door with her arm around Cynthia. She seemed to be supporting
the girl, who looked utterly dazed and unlike herself. Her face was
heavily flushed, and she yawned repeatedly.

“Poor Cynthia is quite frightened,” said Mrs. Cavendish in a low clear
voice. She herself, I noticed, was dressed in her white land smock.
Then it must be later than I thought. I saw that a faint streak of
daylight was showing through the curtains of the windows, and that the
clock on the mantelpiece pointed to close upon five o’clock.

A strangled cry from the bed startled me. A fresh access of pain seized
the unfortunate old lady. The convulsions were of a violence terrible
to behold. Everything was confusion. We thronged round her, powerless
to help or alleviate. A final convulsion lifted her from the bed, until
she appeared to rest upon her head and her heels, with her body arched
in an extraordinary manner. In vain Mary and John tried to administer
more brandy. The moments flew. Again the body arched itself in that
peculiar fashion.

At that moment, Dr. Bauerstein pushed his way authoritatively into the
room. For one instant he stopped dead, staring at the figure on the
bed, and, at the same instant, Mrs. Inglethorp cried out in a strangled
voice, her eyes fixed on the doctor:

“Alfred—Alfred——” Then she fell back motionless on the pillows.

With a stride, the doctor reached the bed, and seizing her arms worked
them energetically, applying what I knew to be artificial respiration.
He issued a few short sharp orders to the servants. An imperious wave
of his hand drove us all to the door. We watched him, fascinated,
though I think we all knew in our hearts that it was too late, and that
nothing could be done now. I could see by the expression on his face
that he himself had little hope.

Finally he abandoned his task, shaking his head gravely. At that
moment, we heard footsteps outside, and Dr. Wilkins, Mrs. Inglethorp’s
own doctor, a portly, fussy little man, came bustling in.

In a few words Dr. Bauerstein explained how he had happened to be
passing the lodge gates as the car came out, and had run up to the
house as fast as he could, whilst the car went on to fetch Dr. Wilkins.
With a faint gesture of the hand, he indicated the figure on the bed.

“Ve—ry sad. Ve—ry sad,” murmured Dr. Wilkins. “Poor dear lady. Always
did far too much—far too much—against my advice. I warned her. Her
heart was far from strong. ‘Take it easy,’ I said to her,
‘Take—it—easy’. But no—her zeal for good works was too great. Nature
rebelled. Na—ture—re—belled.”

Dr. Bauerstein, I noticed, was watching the local doctor narrowly. He
still kept his eyes fixed on him as he spoke.

“The convulsions were of a peculiar violence, Dr. Wilkins. I am sorry
you were not here in time to witness them. They were quite—tetanic in
character.”

“Ah!” said Dr. Wilkins wisely.

“I should like to speak to you in private,” said Dr. Bauerstein. He
turned to John. “You do not object?”

“Certainly not.”

We all trooped out into the corridor, leaving the two doctors alone,
and I heard the key turned in the lock behind us.

We went slowly down the stairs. I was violently excited. I have a
certain talent for deduction, and Dr. Bauerstein’s manner had started a
flock of wild surmises in my mind. Mary Cavendish laid her hand upon my
arm.

“What is it? Why did Dr. Bauerstein seem so—peculiar?”

I looked at her.

“Do you know what I think?”

“What?”

“Listen!” I looked round, the others were out of earshot. I lowered my
voice to a whisper. “I believe she has been poisoned! I’m certain Dr.
Bauerstein suspects it.”

“_What?_” She shrank against the wall, the pupils of her eyes dilating
wildly. Then, with a sudden cry that startled me, she cried out: “No,
no—not that—not that!” And breaking from me, fled up the stairs. I
followed her, afraid that she was going to faint. I found her leaning
against the bannisters, deadly pale. She waved me away impatiently.

“No, no—leave me. I’d rather be alone. Let me just be quiet for a
minute or two. Go down to the others.”

I obeyed her reluctantly. John and Lawrence were in the dining-room. I
joined them. We were all silent, but I suppose I voiced the thoughts of
us all when I at last broke it by saying:

“Where is Mr. Inglethorp?”

John shook his head.

“He’s not in the house.”

Our eyes met. Where _was_ Alfred Inglethorp? His absence was strange
and inexplicable. I remembered Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words. What lay
beneath them? What more could she have told us, if she had had time?

At last we heard the doctors descending the stairs. Dr. Wilkins was
looking important and excited, and trying to conceal an inward
exultation under a manner of decorous calm. Dr. Bauerstein remained in
the background, his grave bearded face unchanged. Dr. Wilkins was the
spokesman for the two. He addressed himself to John:

“Mr. Cavendish, I should like your consent to a post-mortem.”

“Is that necessary?” asked John gravely. A spasm of pain crossed his
face.

“Absolutely,” said Dr. Bauerstein.

“You mean by that——?”

“That neither Dr. Wilkins nor myself could give a death certificate
under the circumstances.”

John bent his head.

“In that case, I have no alternative but to agree.”

“Thank you,” said Dr. Wilkins briskly. “We propose that it should take
place to-morrow night—or rather to-night.” And he glanced at the
daylight. “Under the circumstances, I am afraid an inquest can hardly
be avoided—these formalities are necessary, but I beg that you won’t
distress yourselves.”

There was a pause, and then Dr. Bauerstein drew two keys from his
pocket, and handed them to John.

“These are the keys of the two rooms. I have locked them and, in my
opinion, they would be better kept locked for the present.”

The doctors then departed.

I had been turning over an idea in my head, and I felt that the moment
had now come to broach it. Yet I was a little chary of doing so. John,
I knew, had a horror of any kind of publicity, and was an easygoing
optimist, who preferred never to meet trouble half-way. It might be
difficult to convince him of the soundness of my plan. Lawrence, on the
other hand, being less conventional, and having more imagination, I
felt I might count upon as an ally. There was no doubt that the moment
had come for me to take the lead.

“John,” I said, “I am going to ask you something.”

“Well?”

“You remember my speaking of my friend Poirot? The Belgian who is here?
He has been a most famous detective.”

“Yes.”

“I want you to let me call him in—to investigate this matter.”

“What—now? Before the post-mortem?”

“Yes, time is an advantage if—if—there has been foul play.”

“Rubbish!” cried Lawrence angrily. “In my opinion the whole thing is a
mare’s nest of Bauerstein’s! Wilkins hadn’t an idea of such a thing,
until Bauerstein put it into his head. But, like all specialists,
Bauerstein’s got a bee in his bonnet. Poisons are his hobby, so of
course he sees them everywhere.”

I confess that I was surprised by Lawrence’s attitude. He was so seldom
vehement about anything.

John hesitated.

“I can’t feel as you do, Lawrence,” he said at last. “I’m inclined to
give Hastings a free hand, though I should prefer to wait a bit. We
don’t want any unnecessary scandal.”

“No, no,” I cried eagerly, “you need have no fear of that. Poirot is
discretion itself.”

“Very well, then, have it your own way. I leave it in your hands.
Though, if it is as we suspect, it seems a clear enough case. God
forgive me if I am wronging him!”

I looked at my watch. It was six o’clock. I determined to lose no time.

Five minutes’ delay, however, I allowed myself. I spent it in
ransacking the library until I discovered a medical book which gave a
description of strychnine poisoning.




CHAPTER IV.
POIROT INVESTIGATES


The house which the Belgians occupied in the village was quite close to
the park gates. One could save time by taking a narrow path through the
long grass, which cut off the detours of the winding drive. So I,
accordingly, went that way. I had nearly reached the lodge, when my
attention was arrested by the running figure of a man approaching me.
It was Mr. Inglethorp. Where had he been? How did he intend to explain
his absence?

He accosted me eagerly.

“My God! This is terrible! My poor wife! I have only just heard.”

“Where have you been?” I asked.

“Denby kept me late last night. It was one o’clock before we’d
finished. Then I found that I’d forgotten the latch-key after all. I
didn’t want to arouse the household, so Denby gave me a bed.”

“How did you hear the news?” I asked.

“Wilkins knocked Denby up to tell him. My poor Emily! She was so
self-sacrificing—such a noble character. She over-taxed her strength.”

A wave of revulsion swept over me. What a consummate hypocrite the man
was!

“I must hurry on,” I said, thankful that he did not ask me whither I
was bound.

In a few minutes I was knocking at the door of Leastways Cottage.

Getting no answer, I repeated my summons impatiently. A window above me
was cautiously opened, and Poirot himself looked out.

He gave an exclamation of surprise at seeing me. In a few brief words,
I explained the tragedy that had occurred, and that I wanted his help.

“Wait, my friend, I will let you in, and you shall recount to me the
affair whilst I dress.”

In a few moments he had unbarred the door, and I followed him up to his
room. There he installed me in a chair, and I related the whole story,
keeping back nothing, and omitting no circumstance, however
insignificant, whilst he himself made a careful and deliberate toilet.

I told him of my awakening, of Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words, of her
husband’s absence, of the quarrel the day before, of the scrap of
conversation between Mary and her mother-in-law that I had overheard,
of the former quarrel between Mrs. Inglethorp and Evelyn Howard, and of
the latter’s innuendoes.

I was hardly as clear as I could wish. I repeated myself several times,
and occasionally had to go back to some detail that I had forgotten.
Poirot smiled kindly on me.

“The mind is confused? Is it not so? Take time, _mon ami_. You are
agitated; you are excited—it is but natural. Presently, when we are
calmer, we will arrange the facts, neatly, each in his proper place. We
will examine—and reject. Those of importance we will put on one side;
those of no importance, pouf!”—he screwed up his cherub-like face, and
puffed comically enough—“blow them away!”

“That’s all very well,” I objected, “but how are you going to decide
what is important, and what isn’t? That always seems the difficulty to
me.”

Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustache
with exquisite care.

“Not so. _Voyons!_ One fact leads to another—so we continue. Does the
next fit in with that? _A merveille!_ Good! We can proceed. This next
little fact—no! Ah, that is curious! There is something missing—a link
in the chain that is not there. We examine. We search. And that little
curious fact, that possibly paltry little detail that will not tally,
we put it here!” He made an extravagant gesture with his hand. “It is
significant! It is tremendous!”

“Y—es——”

“Ah!” Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailed
before it. “Beware! Peril to the detective who says: ‘It is so small—it
does not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it.’ That way lies
confusion! Everything matters.”

“I know. You always told me that. That’s why I have gone into all the
details of this thing whether they seemed to me relevant or not.”

“And I am pleased with you. You have a good memory, and you have given
me the facts faithfully. Of the order in which you present them, I say
nothing—truly, it is deplorable! But I make allowances—you are upset.
To that I attribute the circumstance that you have omitted one fact of
paramount importance.”

“What is that?” I asked.

“You have not told me if Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night.”

I stared at him. Surely the war had affected the little man’s brain. He
was carefully engaged in brushing his coat before putting it on, and
seemed wholly engrossed in the task.

“I don’t remember,” I said. “And, anyway, I don’t see——”

“You do not see? But it is of the first importance.”

“I can’t see why,” I said, rather nettled. “As far as I can remember,
she didn’t eat much. She was obviously upset, and it had taken her
appetite away. That was only natural.”

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “it was only natural.”

He opened a drawer, and took out a small despatch-case, then turned to
me.

“Now I am ready. We will proceed to the château, and study matters on
the spot. Excuse me, _mon ami_, you dressed in haste, and your tie is
on one side. Permit me.” With a deft gesture, he rearranged it.

“_Ça y est!_ Now, shall we start?”

We hurried up the village, and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirot
stopped for a moment, and gazed sorrowfully over the beautiful expanse
of park, still glittering with morning dew.

“So beautiful, so beautiful, and yet, the poor family, plunged in
sorrow, prostrated with grief.”

He looked at me keenly as he spoke, and I was aware that I reddened
under his prolonged gaze.

Was the family prostrated by grief? Was the sorrow at Mrs. Inglethorp’s
death so great? I realized that there was an emotional lack in the
atmosphere. The dead woman had not the gift of commanding love. Her
death was a shock and a distress, but she would not be passionately
regretted.

Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.

“No, you are right,” he said, “it is not as though there was a blood
tie. She has been kind and generous to these Cavendishes, but she was
not their own mother. Blood tells—always remember that—blood tells.”

“Poirot,” I said, “I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know if
Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night? I have been turning it over in my
mind, but I can’t see how it has anything to do with the matter?”

He was silent for a minute or two as we walked along, but finally he
said:

“I do not mind telling you—though, as you know, it is not my habit to
explain until the end is reached. The present contention is that Mrs.
Inglethorp died of strychnine poisoning, presumably administered in her
coffee.”

“Yes?”

“Well, what time was the coffee served?”

“About eight o’clock.”

“Therefore she drank it between then and half-past eight—certainly not
much later. Well, strychnine is a fairly rapid poison. Its effects
would be felt very soon, probably in about an hour. Yet, in Mrs.
Inglethorp’s case, the symptoms do not manifest themselves until five
o’clock the next morning: nine hours! But a heavy meal, taken at about
the same time as the poison, might retard its effects, though hardly to
that extent. Still, it is a possibility to be taken into account. But,
according to you, she ate very little for supper, and yet the symptoms
do not develop until early the next morning! Now that is a curious
circumstance, my friend. Something may arise at the autopsy to explain
it. In the meantime, remember it.”

As we neared the house, John came out and met us. His face looked weary
and haggard.

“This is a very dreadful business, Monsieur Poirot,” he said. “Hastings
has explained to you that we are anxious for no publicity?”

“I comprehend perfectly.”

“You see, it is only suspicion so far. We have nothing to go upon.”

“Precisely. It is a matter of precaution only.”

John turned to me, taking out his cigarette-case, and lighting a
cigarette as he did so.

“You know that fellow Inglethorp is back?”

“Yes. I met him.”

John flung the match into an adjacent flower bed, a proceeding which
was too much for Poirot’s feelings. He retrieved it, and buried it
neatly.

“It’s jolly difficult to know how to treat him.”

“That difficulty will not exist long,” pronounced Poirot quietly.

John looked puzzled, not quite understanding the portent of this
cryptic saying. He handed the two keys which Dr. Bauerstein had given
him to me.

“Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.”

“The rooms are locked?” asked Poirot.

“Dr. Bauerstein considered it advisable.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“Then he is very sure. Well, that simplifies matters for us.”

We went up together to the room of the tragedy. For convenience I
append a plan of the room and the principal articles of furniture in
it.

[Illustration]

Poirot locked the door on the inside, and proceeded to a minute
inspection of the room. He darted from one object to the other with the
agility of a grasshopper. I remained by the door, fearing to obliterate
any clues. Poirot, however, did not seem grateful to me for my
forbearance.

“What have you, my friend,” he cried, “that you remain there like—how
do you say it?—ah, yes, the stuck pig?”

I explained that I was afraid of obliterating any foot-marks.

“Foot-marks? But what an idea! There has already been practically an
army in the room! What foot-marks are we likely to find? No, come here
and aid me in my search. I will put down my little case until I need
it.”

He did so, on the round table by the window, but it was an ill-advised
proceeding; for, the top of it being loose, it tilted up, and
precipitated the despatch-case on the floor.

“_Eh voilà une table!_” cried Poirot. “Ah, my friend, one may live in a
big house and yet have no comfort.”

After which piece of moralizing, he resumed his search.

A small purple despatch-case, with a key in the lock, on the
writing-table, engaged his attention for some time. He took out the key
from the lock, and passed it to me to inspect. I saw nothing peculiar,
however. It was an ordinary key of the Yale type, with a bit of twisted
wire through the handle.

Next, he examined the framework of the door we had broken in, assuring
himself that the bolt had really been shot. Then he went to the door
opposite leading into Cynthia’s room. That door was also bolted, as I
had stated. However, he went to the length of unbolting it, and opening
and shutting it several times; this he did with the utmost precaution
against making any noise. Suddenly something in the bolt itself seemed
to rivet his attention. He examined it carefully, and then, nimbly
whipping out a pair of small forceps from his case, he drew out some
minute particle which he carefully sealed up in a tiny envelope.

On the chest of drawers there was a tray with a spirit lamp and a small
saucepan on it. A small quantity of a dark fluid remained in the
saucepan, and an empty cup and saucer that had been drunk out of stood
near it.

I wondered how I could have been so unobservant as to overlook this.
Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger into
liquid, and tasted it gingerly. He made a grimace.

“Cocoa—with—I think—rum in it.”

He passed on to the debris on the floor, where the table by the bed had
been overturned. A reading-lamp, some books, matches, a bunch of keys,
and the crushed fragments of a coffee-cup lay scattered about.

“Ah, this is curious,” said Poirot.

“I must confess that I see nothing particularly curious about it.”

“You do not? Observe the lamp—the chimney is broken in two places; they
lie there as they fell. But see, the coffee-cup is absolutely smashed
to powder.”

“Well,” I said wearily, “I suppose someone must have stepped on it.”

“Exactly,” said Poirot, in an odd voice. “Someone stepped on it.”

He rose from his knees, and walked slowly across to the mantelpiece,
where he stood abstractedly fingering the ornaments, and straightening
them—a trick of his when he was agitated.

“_Mon ami_,” he said, turning to me, “somebody stepped on that cup,
grinding it to powder, and the reason they did so was either because it
contained strychnine or—which is far more serious—because it did not
contain strychnine!”

I made no reply. I was bewildered, but I knew that it was no good
asking him to explain. In a moment or two he roused himself, and went
on with his investigations. He picked up the bunch of keys from the
floor, and twirling them round in his fingers finally selected one,
very bright and shining, which he tried in the lock of the purple
despatch-case. It fitted, and he opened the box, but after a moment’s
hesitation, closed and relocked it, and slipped the bunch of keys, as
well as the key that had originally stood in the lock, into his own
pocket.

“I have no authority to go through these papers. But it should be
done—at once!”

He then made a very careful examination of the drawers of the
wash-stand. Crossing the room to the left-hand window, a round stain,
hardly visible on the dark brown carpet, seemed to interest him
particularly. He went down on his knees, examining it minutely—even
going so far as to smell it.

Finally, he poured a few drops of the cocoa into a test tube, sealing
it up carefully. His next proceeding was to take out a little notebook.

“We have found in this room,” he said, writing busily, “six points of
interest. Shall I enumerate them, or will you?”

“Oh, you,” I replied hastily.

“Very well, then. One, a coffee-cup that has been ground into powder;
two, a despatch-case with a key in the lock; three, a stain on the
floor.”

“That may have been done some time ago,” I interrupted.

“No, for it is still perceptibly damp and smells of coffee. Four, a
fragment of some dark green fabric—only a thread or two, but
recognizable.”

“Ah!” I cried. “That was what you sealed up in the envelope.”

“Yes. It may turn out to be a piece of one of Mrs. Inglethorp’s own
dresses, and quite unimportant. We shall see. Five, _this_!” With a
dramatic gesture, he pointed to a large splash of candle grease on the
floor by the writing-table. “It must have been done since yesterday,
otherwise a good housemaid would have at once removed it with
blotting-paper and a hot iron. One of my best hats once—but that is not
to the point.”

“It was very likely done last night. We were very agitated. Or perhaps
Mrs. Inglethorp herself dropped her candle.”

“You brought only one candle into the room?”

“Yes. Lawrence Cavendish was carrying it. But he was very upset. He
seemed to see something over here”—I indicated the mantelpiece—“that
absolutely paralysed him.”

“That is interesting,” said Poirot quickly. “Yes, it is suggestive”—his
eye sweeping the whole length of the wall—“but it was not his candle
that made this great patch, for you perceive that this is white grease;
whereas Monsieur Lawrence’s candle, which is still on the
dressing-table, is pink. On the other hand, Mrs. Inglethorp had no
candlestick in the room, only a reading-lamp.”

“Then,” I said, “what do you deduce?”

To which my friend only made a rather irritating reply, urging me to
use my own natural faculties.

“And the sixth point?” I asked. “I suppose it is the sample of cocoa.”

“No,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “I might have included that in the six,
but I did not. No, the sixth point I will keep to myself for the
present.”

He looked quickly round the room. “There is nothing more to be done
here, I think, unless”—he stared earnestly and long at the dead ashes
in the grate. “The fire burns—and it destroys. But by chance—there
might be—let us see!”

Deftly, on hands and knees, he began to sort the ashes from the grate
into the fender, handling them with the greatest caution. Suddenly, he
gave a faint exclamation.

“The forceps, Hastings!”

I quickly handed them to him, and with skill he extracted a small piece
of half charred paper.

“There, _mon ami!_” he cried. “What do you think of that?”

I scrutinized the fragment. This is an exact reproduction of it:—

[Illustration]

I was puzzled. It was unusually thick, quite unlike ordinary notepaper.
Suddenly an idea struck me.

“Poirot!” I cried. “This is a fragment of a will!”

“Exactly.”

I looked up at him sharply.

“You are not surprised?”

“No,” he said gravely, “I expected it.”

I relinquished the piece of paper, and watched him put it away in his
case, with the same methodical care that he bestowed on everything. My
brain was in a whirl. What was this complication of a will? Who had
destroyed it? The person who had left the candle grease on the floor?
Obviously. But how had anyone gained admission? All the doors had been
bolted on the inside.

“Now, my friend,” said Poirot briskly, “we will go. I should like to
ask a few questions of the parlourmaid—Dorcas, her name is, is it not?”

We passed through Alfred Inglethorp’s room, and Poirot delayed long
enough to make a brief but fairly comprehensive examination of it. We
went out through that door, locking both it and that of Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room as before.

I took him down to the boudoir which he had expressed a wish to see,
and went myself in search of Dorcas.

When I returned with her, however, the boudoir was empty.

“Poirot,” I cried, “where are you?”

“I am here, my friend.”

He had stepped outside the French window, and was standing, apparently
lost in admiration, before the various shaped flower beds.

“Admirable!” he murmured. “Admirable! What symmetry! Observe that
crescent; and those diamonds—their neatness rejoices the eye. The
spacing of the plants, also, is perfect. It has been recently done; is
it not so?”

“Yes, I believe they were at it yesterday afternoon. But come in—Dorcas
is here.”

“_Eh bien, eh bien!_ Do not grudge me a moment’s satisfaction of the
eye.”

“Yes, but this affair is more important.”

“And how do you know that these fine begonias are not of equal
importance?”

I shrugged my shoulders. There was really no arguing with him if he
chose to take that line.

“You do not agree? But such things have been. Well, we will come in and
interview the brave Dorcas.”

Dorcas was standing in the boudoir, her hands folded in front of her,
and her grey hair rose in stiff waves under her white cap. She was the
very model and picture of a good old-fashioned servant.

In her attitude towards Poirot, she was inclined to be suspicious, but
he soon broke down her defences. He drew forward a chair.

“Pray be seated, mademoiselle.”

“Thank you, sir.”

“You have been with your mistress many years, is it not so?”

“Ten years, sir.”

“That is a long time, and very faithful service. You were much attached
to her, were you not?”

“She was a very good mistress to me, sir.”

“Then you will not object to answering a few questions. I put them to
you with Mr. Cavendish’s full approval.”

“Oh, certainly, sir.”

“Then I will begin by asking you about the events of yesterday
afternoon. Your mistress had a quarrel?”

“Yes, sir. But I don’t know that I ought——” Dorcas hesitated.

Poirot looked at her keenly.

“My good Dorcas, it is necessary that I should know every detail of
that quarrel as fully as possible. Do not think that you are betraying
your mistress’s secrets. Your mistress lies dead, and it is necessary
that we should know all—if we are to avenge her. Nothing can bring her
back to life, but we do hope, if there has been foul play, to bring the
murderer to justice.”

“Amen to that,” said Dorcas fiercely. “And, naming no names, there’s
_one_ in this house that none of us could ever abide! And an ill day it
was when first _he_ darkened the threshold.”

Poirot waited for her indignation to subside, and then, resuming his
business-like tone, he asked:

“Now, as to this quarrel? What is the first you heard of it?”

“Well, sir, I happened to be going along the hall outside yesterday——”

“What time was that?”

“I couldn’t say exactly, sir, but it wasn’t tea-time by a long way.
Perhaps four o’clock—or it may have been a bit later. Well, sir, as I
said, I happened to be passing along, when I heard voices very loud and
angry in here. I didn’t exactly mean to listen, but—well, there it is.
I stopped. The door was shut, but the mistress was speaking very sharp
and clear, and I heard what she said quite plainly. ‘You have lied to
me, and deceived me,’ she said. I didn’t hear what Mr. Inglethorp
replied. He spoke a good bit lower than she did—but she answered: ‘How
dare you? I have kept you and clothed you and fed you! You owe
everything to me! And this is how you repay me! By bringing disgrace
upon our name!’ Again I didn’t hear what he said, but she went on:
‘Nothing that you can say will make any difference. I see my duty
clearly. My mind is made up. You need not think that any fear of
publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.’ Then I
thought I heard them coming out, so I went off quickly.”

“You are sure it was Mr. Inglethorp’s voice you heard?”

“Oh, yes, sir, whose else’s could it be?”

“Well, what happened next?”

“Later, I came back to the hall; but it was all quiet. At five o’clock,
Mrs. Inglethorp rang the bell and told me to bring her a cup of
tea—nothing to eat—to the boudoir. She was looking dreadful—so white
and upset. ‘Dorcas,’ she says, ‘I’ve had a great shock.’ ‘I’m sorry for
that, m’m,’ I says. ‘You’ll feel better after a nice hot cup of tea,
m’m.’ She had something in her hand. I don’t know if it was a letter,
or just a piece of paper, but it had writing on it, and she kept
staring at it, almost as if she couldn’t believe what was written
there. She whispered to herself, as though she had forgotten I was
there: ‘These few words—and everything’s changed.’ And then she says to
me: ‘Never trust a man, Dorcas, they’re not worth it!’ I hurried off,
and got her a good strong cup of tea, and she thanked me, and said
she’d feel better when she’d drunk it. ‘I don’t know what to do,’ she
says. ‘Scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing, Dorcas.
I’d rather hush it up if I could.’ Mrs. Cavendish came in just then, so
she didn’t say any more.”

“She still had the letter, or whatever it was, in her hand?”



“Yes, sir.”

“What would she be likely to do with it afterwards?”

“Well, I don’t know, sir, I expect she would lock it up in that purple
case of hers.”

“Is that where she usually kept important papers?”

“Yes, sir. She brought it down with her every morning, and took it up
every night.”

“When did she lose the key of it?”

“She missed it yesterday at lunch-time, sir, and told me to look
carefully for it. She was very much put out about it.”

“But she had a duplicate key?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

Dorcas was looking very curiously at him and, to tell the truth, so was
I. What was all this about a lost key? Poirot smiled.

“Never mind, Dorcas, it is my business to know things. Is this the key
that was lost?” He drew from his pocket the key that he had found in
the lock of the despatch-case upstairs.

Dorcas’s eyes looked as though they would pop out of her head.

“That’s it, sir, right enough. But where did you find it? I looked
everywhere for it.”

“Ah, but you see it was not in the same place yesterday as it was
to-day. Now, to pass to another subject, had your mistress a dark green
dress in her wardrobe?”

Dorcas was rather startled by the unexpected question.

“No, sir.”

“Are you quite sure?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

“Has anyone else in the house got a green dress?”

Dorcas reflected.

“Miss Cynthia has a green evening dress.”

“Light or dark green?”

“A light green, sir; a sort of chiffon, they call it.”

“Ah, that is not what I want. And nobody else has anything green?”

“No, sir—not that I know of.”

Poirot’s face did not betray a trace of whether he was disappointed or
otherwise. He merely remarked:

“Good, we will leave that and pass on. Have you any reason to believe
that your mistress was likely to take a sleeping powder last night?”

“Not _last_ night, sir, I know she didn’t.”

“Why do you know so positively?”

“Because the box was empty. She took the last one two days ago, and she
didn’t have any more made up.”

“You are quite sure of that?”

“Positive, sir.”

“Then that is cleared up! By the way, your mistress didn’t ask you to
sign any paper yesterday?”

“To sign a paper? No, sir.”

“When Mr. Hastings and Mr. Lawrence came in yesterday evening, they
found your mistress busy writing letters. I suppose you can give me no
idea to whom these letters were addressed?”

“I’m afraid I couldn’t, sir. I was out in the evening. Perhaps Annie
could tell you, though she’s a careless girl. Never cleared the
coffee-cups away last night. That’s what happens when I’m not here to
look after things.”

Poirot lifted his hand.

“Since they have been left, Dorcas, leave them a little longer, I pray
you. I should like to examine them.”

“Very well, sir.”

“What time did you go out last evening?”

“About six o’clock, sir.”

“Thank you, Dorcas, that is all I have to ask you.” He rose and
strolled to the window. “I have been admiring these flower beds. How
many gardeners are employed here, by the way?”

“Only three now, sir. Five, we had, before the war, when it was kept as
a gentleman’s place should be. I wish you could have seen it then, sir.
A fair sight it was. But now there’s only old Manning, and young
William, and a new-fashioned woman gardener in breeches and such-like.
Ah, these are dreadful times!”

“The good times will come again, Dorcas. At least, we hope so. Now,
will you send Annie to me here?”

“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”

“How did you know that Mrs. Inglethorp took sleeping powders?” I asked,
in lively curiosity, as Dorcas left the room. “And about the lost key
and the duplicate?”

“One thing at a time. As to the sleeping powders, I knew by this.” He
suddenly produced a small cardboard box, such as chemists use for
powders.

“Where did you find it?”

“In the wash-stand drawer in Mrs. Inglethorp’s bedroom. It was Number
Six of my catalogue.”

“But I suppose, as the last powder was taken two days ago, it is not of
much importance?”

“Probably not, but do you notice anything that strikes you as peculiar
about this box?”

I examined it closely.

“No, I can’t say that I do.”

“Look at the label.”

I read the label carefully: “‘One powder to be taken at bedtime, if
required. Mrs. Inglethorp.’ No, I see nothing unusual.”

“Not the fact that there is no chemist’s name?”

“Ah!” I exclaimed. “To be sure, that is odd!”

“Have you ever known a chemist to send out a box like that, without his
printed name?”

“No, I can’t say that I have.”

I was becoming quite excited, but Poirot damped my ardour by remarking:

“Yet the explanation is quite simple. So do not intrigue yourself, my
friend.”

An audible creaking proclaimed the approach of Annie, so I had no time
to reply.

Annie was a fine, strapping girl, and was evidently labouring under
intense excitement, mingled with a certain ghoulish enjoyment of the
tragedy.

Poirot came to the point at once, with a business-like briskness.

“I sent for you, Annie, because I thought you might be able to tell me
something about the letters Mrs. Inglethorp wrote last night. How many
were there? And can you tell me any of the names and addresses?”

Annie considered.

“There were four letters, sir. One was to Miss Howard, and one was to
Mr. Wells, the lawyer, and the other two I don’t think I remember,
sir—oh, yes, one was to Ross’s, the caterers in Tadminster. The other
one, I don’t remember.”

“Think,” urged Poirot.

Annie racked her brains in vain.

“I’m sorry, sir, but it’s clean gone. I don’t think I can have noticed
it.”

“It does not matter,” said Poirot, not betraying any sign of
disappointment. “Now I want to ask you about something else. There is a
saucepan in Mrs. Inglethorp’s room with some cocoa in it. Did she have
that every night?”

“Yes, sir, it was put in her room every evening, and she warmed it up
in the night—whenever she fancied it.”

“What was it? Plain cocoa?”

“Yes, sir, made with milk, with a teaspoonful of sugar, and two
teaspoonfuls of rum in it.”

“Who took it to her room?”

“I did, sir.”

“Always?”

“Yes, sir.”

“At what time?”

“When I went to draw the curtains, as a rule, sir.”

“Did you bring it straight up from the kitchen then?”

“No, sir, you see there’s not much room on the gas stove, so cook used
to make it early, before putting the vegetables on for supper. Then I
used to bring it up, and put it on the table by the swing door, and
take it into her room later.”

“The swing door is in the left wing, is it not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And the table, is it on this side of the door, or on the
farther—servants’ side?”

“It’s this side, sir.”

“What time did you bring it up last night?”

“About quarter-past seven, I should say, sir.”

“And when did you take it into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room?”

“When I went to shut up, sir. About eight o’clock. Mrs. Inglethorp came
up to bed before I’d finished.”

“Then, between seven-fifteen and eight o’clock, the cocoa was standing
on the table in the left wing?”

“Yes, sir.” Annie had been growing redder and redder in the face, and
now she blurted out unexpectedly:

“And if there _was_ salt in it, sir, it wasn’t me. I never took the
salt near it.”

“What makes you think there was salt in it?” asked Poirot.

“Seeing it on the tray, sir.”

“You saw some salt on the tray?”

“Yes. Coarse kitchen salt, it looked. I never noticed it when I took
the tray up, but when I came to take it into the mistress’s room I saw
it at once, and I suppose I ought to have taken it down again, and
asked cook to make some fresh. But I was in a hurry, because Dorcas was
out, and I thought maybe the cocoa itself was all right, and the salt
had only gone on the tray. So I dusted it off with my apron, and took
it in.”

I had the utmost difficulty in controlling my excitement. Unknown to
herself, Annie had provided us with an important piece of evidence. How
she would have gaped if she had realized that her “coarse kitchen salt”
was strychnine, one of the most deadly poisons known to mankind. I
marvelled at Poirot’s calm. His self-control was astonishing. I awaited
his next question with impatience, but it disappointed me.

“When you went into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, was the door leading into
Miss Cynthia’s room bolted?”

“Oh! Yes, sir; it always was. It had never been opened.”

“And the door into Mr. Inglethorp’s room? Did you notice if that was
bolted too?”

Annie hesitated.

“I couldn’t rightly say, sir; it was shut but I couldn’t say whether it
was bolted or not.”

“When you finally left the room, did Mrs. Inglethorp bolt the door
after you?”

“No, sir, not then, but I expect she did later. She usually did lock it
at night. The door into the passage, that is.”

“Did you notice any candle grease on the floor when you did the room
yesterday?”

“Candle grease? Oh, no, sir. Mrs. Inglethorp didn’t have a candle, only
a reading-lamp.”

“Then, if there had been a large patch of candle grease on the floor,
you think you would have been sure to have seen it?”

“Yes, sir, and I would have taken it out with a piece of blotting-paper
and a hot iron.”

Then Poirot repeated the question he had put to Dorcas:

“Did your mistress ever have a green dress?”

“No, sir.”

“Nor a mantle, nor a cape, nor a—how do you call it?—a sports coat?”

“Not green, sir.”

“Nor anyone else in the house?”

Annie reflected.

“No, sir.”

“You are sure of that?”

“Quite sure.”

“_Bien!_ That is all I want to know. Thank you very much.”

With a nervous giggle, Annie took herself creakingly out of the room.
My pent-up excitement burst forth.

“Poirot,” I cried, “I congratulate you! This is a great discovery.”

“What is a great discovery?”

“Why, that it was the cocoa and not the coffee that was poisoned. That
explains everything! Of course it did not take effect until the early
morning, since the cocoa was only drunk in the middle of the night.”

“So you think that the cocoa—mark well what I say, Hastings, the
_cocoa_—contained strychnine?”

“Of course! That salt on the tray, what else could it have been?”

“It might have been salt,” replied Poirot placidly.

I shrugged my shoulders. If he was going to take the matter that way,
it was no good arguing with him. The idea crossed my mind, not for the
first time, that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thought
it lucky that he had associated with him someone of a more receptive
type of mind.

Poirot was surveying me with quietly twinkling eyes.

“You are not pleased with me, _mon ami?_”

“My dear Poirot,” I said coldly, “it is not for me to dictate to you.
You have a right to your own opinion, just as I have to mine.”

“A most admirable sentiment,” remarked Poirot, rising briskly to his
feet. “Now I have finished with this room. By the way, whose is the
smaller desk in the corner?”

“Mr. Inglethorp’s.”

“Ah!” He tried the roll top tentatively. “Locked. But perhaps one of
Mrs. Inglethorp’s keys would open it.” He tried several, twisting and
turning them with a practiced hand, and finally uttering an ejaculation
of satisfaction. “_Voilà!_ It is not the key, but it will open it at a
pinch.” He slid back the roll top, and ran a rapid eye over the neatly
filed papers. To my surprise, he did not examine them, merely remarking
approvingly as he relocked the desk: “Decidedly, he is a man of method,
this Mr. Inglethorp!”

A “man of method” was, in Poirot’s estimation, the highest praise that
could be bestowed on any individual.

I felt that my friend was not what he had been as he rambled on
disconnectedly:

“There were no stamps in his desk, but there might have been, eh, _mon
ami?_ There might have been? Yes”—his eyes wandered round the
room—“this boudoir has nothing more to tell us. It did not yield much.
Only this.”

He pulled a crumpled envelope out of his pocket, and tossed it over to
me. It was rather a curious document. A plain, dirty looking old
envelope with a few words scrawled across it, apparently at random. The
following is a facsimile of it.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER V.
“IT ISN’T STRYCHNINE, IS IT?”


“Where did you find this?” I asked Poirot, in lively curiosity.

“In the waste-paper basket. You recognise the handwriting?”

“Yes, it is Mrs. Inglethorp’s. But what does it mean?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“I cannot say—but it is suggestive.”

A wild idea flashed across me. Was it possible that Mrs. Inglethorp’s
mind was deranged? Had she some fantastic idea of demoniacal
possession? And, if that were so, was it not also possible that she
might have taken her own life?

I was about to expound these theories to Poirot, when his own words
distracted me.

“Come,” he said, “now to examine the coffee-cups!”

“My dear Poirot! What on earth is the good of that, now that we know
about the cocoa?”

“Oh, _là là!_ That miserable cocoa!” cried Poirot flippantly.

He laughed with apparent enjoyment, raising his arms to heaven in mock
despair, in what I could not but consider the worst possible taste.

“And, anyway,” I said, with increasing coldness, “as Mrs. Inglethorp
took her coffee upstairs with her, I do not see what you expect to
find, unless you consider it likely that we shall discover a packet of
strychnine on the coffee tray!”

Poirot was sobered at once.

“Come, come, my friend,” he said, slipping his arms through mine. “_Ne
vous fâchez pas!_ Allow me to interest myself in my coffee-cups, and I
will respect your cocoa. There! Is it a bargain?”

He was so quaintly humorous that I was forced to laugh; and we went
together to the drawing-room, where the coffee-cups and tray remained
undisturbed as we had left them.

Poirot made me recapitulate the scene of the night before, listening
very carefully, and verifying the position of the various cups.

“So Mrs. Cavendish stood by the tray—and poured out. Yes. Then she came
across to the window where you sat with Mademoiselle Cynthia. Yes. Here
are the three cups. And the cup on the mantelpiece, half drunk, that
would be Mr. Lawrence Cavendish’s. And the one on the tray?”

“John Cavendish’s. I saw him put it down there.”

“Good. One, two, three, four, five—but where, then, is the cup of Mr.
Inglethorp?”

“He does not take coffee.”

“Then all are accounted for. One moment, my friend.”

With infinite care, he took a drop or two from the grounds in each cup,
sealing them up in separate test tubes, tasting each in turn as he did
so. His physiognomy underwent a curious change. An expression gathered
there that I can only describe as half puzzled, and half relieved.

“_Bien!_” he said at last. “It is evident! I had an idea—but clearly I
was mistaken. Yes, altogether I was mistaken. Yet it is strange. But no
matter!”

And, with a characteristic shrug, he dismissed whatever it was that was
worrying him from his mind. I could have told him from the beginning
that this obsession of his over the coffee was bound to end in a blind
alley, but I restrained my tongue. After all, though he was old, Poirot
had been a great man in his day.

“Breakfast is ready,” said John Cavendish, coming in from the hall.
“You will breakfast with us, Monsieur Poirot?”

Poirot acquiesced. I observed John. Already he was almost restored to
his normal self. The shock of the events of the last night had upset
him temporarily, but his equable poise soon swung back to the normal.
He was a man of very little imagination, in sharp contrast with his
brother, who had, perhaps, too much.

Ever since the early hours of the morning, John had been hard at work,
sending telegrams—one of the first had gone to Evelyn Howard—writing
notices for the papers, and generally occupying himself with the
melancholy duties that a death entails.

“May I ask how things are proceeding?” he said. “Do your investigations
point to my mother having died a natural death—or—or must we prepare
ourselves for the worst?”

“I think, Mr. Cavendish,” said Poirot gravely, “that you would do well
not to buoy yourself up with any false hopes. Can you tell me the views
of the other members of the family?”

“My brother Lawrence is convinced that we are making a fuss over
nothing. He says that everything points to its being a simple case of
heart failure.”

“He does, does he? That is very interesting—very interesting,” murmured
Poirot softly. “And Mrs. Cavendish?”

A faint cloud passed over John’s face.

“I have not the least idea what my wife’s views on the subject are.”

The answer brought a momentary stiffness in its train. John broke the
rather awkward silence by saying with a slight effort:

“I told you, didn’t I, that Mr. Inglethorp has returned?”

Poirot bent his head.

“It’s an awkward position for all of us. Of course one has to treat him
as usual—but, hang it all, one’s gorge does rise at sitting down to eat
with a possible murderer!”

Poirot nodded sympathetically.

“I quite understand. It is a very difficult situation for you, Mr.
Cavendish. I would like to ask you one question. Mr. Inglethorp’s
reason for not returning last night was, I believe, that he had
forgotten the latch-key. Is not that so?”

“Yes.”

“I suppose you are quite sure that the latch-key _was_ forgotten—that
he did not take it after all?”

“I have no idea. I never thought of looking. We always keep it in the
hall drawer. I’ll go and see if it’s there now.”

Poirot held up his hand with a faint smile.

“No, no, Mr. Cavendish, it is too late now. I am certain that you would
find it. If Mr. Inglethorp did take it, he has had ample time to
replace it by now.”

“But do you think——”

“I think nothing. If anyone had chanced to look this morning before his
return, and seen it there, it would have been a valuable point in his
favour. That is all.”

John looked perplexed.

“Do not worry,” said Poirot smoothly. “I assure you that you need not
let it trouble you. Since you are so kind, let us go and have some
breakfast.”

Everyone was assembled in the dining-room. Under the circumstances, we
were naturally not a cheerful party. The reaction after a shock is
always trying, and I think we were all suffering from it. Decorum and
good breeding naturally enjoined that our demeanour should be much as
usual, yet I could not help wondering if this self-control were really
a matter of great difficulty. There were no red eyes, no signs of
secretly indulged grief. I felt that I was right in my opinion that
Dorcas was the person most affected by the personal side of the
tragedy.

I pass over Alfred Inglethorp, who acted the bereaved widower in a
manner that I felt to be disgusting in its hypocrisy. Did he know that
we suspected him, I wondered. Surely he could not be unaware of the
fact, conceal it as we would. Did he feel some secret stirring of fear,
or was he confident that his crime would go unpunished? Surely the
suspicion in the atmosphere must warn him that he was already a marked
man.

But did everyone suspect him? What about Mrs. Cavendish? I watched her
as she sat at the head of the table, graceful, composed, enigmatic. In
her soft grey frock, with white ruffles at the wrists falling over her
slender hands, she looked very beautiful. When she chose, however, her
face could be sphinx-like in its inscrutability. She was very silent,
hardly opening her lips, and yet in some queer way I felt that the
great strength of her personality was dominating us all.

And little Cynthia? Did she suspect? She looked very tired and ill, I
thought. The heaviness and languor of her manner were very marked. I
asked her if she were feeling ill, and she answered frankly:

“Yes, I’ve got the most beastly headache.”

“Have another cup of coffee, mademoiselle?” said Poirot solicitously.
“It will revive you. It is unparalleled for the _mal de tête_.” He
jumped up and took her cup.

“No sugar,” said Cynthia, watching him, as he picked up the
sugar-tongs.

“No sugar? You abandon it in the war-time, eh?”

“No, I never take it in coffee.”

“_Sacré!_” murmured Poirot to himself, as he brought back the
replenished cup.

Only I heard him, and glancing up curiously at the little man I saw
that his face was working with suppressed excitement, and his eyes were
as green as a cat’s. He had heard or seen something that had affected
him strongly—but what was it? I do not usually label myself as dense,
but I must confess that nothing out of the ordinary had attracted _my_
attention.

In another moment, the door opened and Dorcas appeared.

“Mr. Wells to see you, sir,” she said to John.

I remembered the name as being that of the lawyer to whom Mrs.
Inglethorp had written the night before.

John rose immediately.

“Show him into my study.” Then he turned to us. “My mother’s lawyer,”
he explained. And in a lower voice: “He is also Coroner—you understand.
Perhaps you would like to come with me?”

We acquiesced and followed him out of the room. John strode on ahead
and I took the opportunity of whispering to Poirot:

“There will be an inquest then?”

Poirot nodded absently. He seemed absorbed in thought; so much so that
my curiosity was aroused.

“What is it? You are not attending to what I say.”

“It is true, my friend. I am much worried.”

“Why?”

“Because Mademoiselle Cynthia does not take sugar in her coffee.”

“What? You cannot be serious?”

“But I am most serious. Ah, there is something there that I do not
understand. My instinct was right.”

“What instinct?”

“The instinct that led me to insist on examining those coffee-cups.
_Chut!_ no more now!”

We followed John into his study, and he closed the door behind us.

Mr. Wells was a pleasant man of middle-age, with keen eyes, and the
typical lawyer’s mouth. John introduced us both, and explained the
reason of our presence.

“You will understand, Wells,” he added, “that this is all strictly
private. We are still hoping that there will turn out to be no need for
investigation of any kind.”

“Quite so, quite so,” said Mr. Wells soothingly. “I wish we could have
spared you the pain and publicity of an inquest, but of course it’s
quite unavoidable in the absence of a doctor’s certificate.”

“Yes, I suppose so.”

“Clever man, Bauerstein. Great authority on toxicology, I believe.”

“Indeed,” said John with a certain stiffness in his manner. Then he
added rather hesitatingly: “Shall we have to appear as witnesses—all of
us, I mean?”

“You, of course—and ah—er—Mr.—er—Inglethorp.”

A slight pause ensued before the lawyer went on in his soothing manner:

“Any other evidence will be simply confirmatory, a mere matter of
form.”

“I see.”

A faint expression of relief swept over John’s face. It puzzled me, for
I saw no occasion for it.

“If you know of nothing to the contrary,” pursued Mr. Wells, “I had
thought of Friday. That will give us plenty of time for the doctor’s
report. The post-mortem is to take place to-night, I believe?”

“Yes.”

“Then that arrangement will suit you?”

“Perfectly.”

“I need not tell you, my dear Cavendish, how distressed I am at this
most tragic affair.”

“Can you give us no help in solving it, monsieur?” interposed Poirot,
speaking for the first time since we had entered the room.

“I?”

“Yes, we heard that Mrs. Inglethorp wrote to you last night. You should
have received the letter this morning.”

“I did, but it contains no information. It is merely a note asking me
to call upon her this morning, as she wanted my advice on a matter of
great importance.”

“She gave you no hint as to what that matter might be?”

“Unfortunately, no.”

“That is a pity,” said John.

“A great pity,” agreed Poirot gravely.

There was silence. Poirot remained lost in thought for a few minutes.
Finally he turned to the lawyer again.

“Mr. Wells, there is one thing I should like to ask you—that is, if it
is not against professional etiquette. In the event of Mrs.
Inglethorp’s death, who would inherit her money?”

The lawyer hesitated a moment, and then replied:

“The knowledge will be public property very soon, so if Mr. Cavendish
does not object——”

“Not at all,” interpolated John.

“I do not see any reason why I should not answer your question. By her
last will, dated August of last year, after various unimportant
legacies to servants, etc., she gave her entire fortune to her stepson,
Mr. John Cavendish.”

“Was not that—pardon the question, Mr. Cavendish—rather unfair to her
other stepson, Mr. Lawrence Cavendish?”

“No, I do not think so. You see, under the terms of their father’s
will, while John inherited the property, Lawrence, at his stepmother’s
death, would come into a considerable sum of money. Mrs. Inglethorp
left her money to her elder stepson, knowing that he would have to keep
up Styles. It was, to my mind, a very fair and equitable distribution.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“I see. But I am right in saying, am I not, that by your English law
that will was automatically revoked when Mrs. Inglethorp remarried?”

Mr. Wells bowed his head.

“As I was about to proceed, Monsieur Poirot, that document is now null
and void.”

“_Hein!_” said Poirot. He reflected for a moment, and then asked: “Was
Mrs. Inglethorp herself aware of that fact?”

“I do not know. She may have been.”

“She was,” said John unexpectedly. “We were discussing the matter of
wills being revoked by marriage only yesterday.”

“Ah! One more question, Mr. Wells. You say ‘her last will.’ Had Mrs.
Inglethorp, then, made several former wills?”

“On an average, she made a new will at least once a year,” said Mr.
Wells imperturbably. “She was given to changing her mind as to her
testamentary dispositions, now benefiting one, now another member of
her family.”

“Suppose,” suggested Poirot, “that, unknown to you, she had made a new
will in favour of someone who was not, in any sense of the word, a
member of the family—we will say Miss Howard, for instance—would you be
surprised?”

“Not in the least.”

“Ah!” Poirot seemed to have exhausted his questions.

I drew close to him, while John and the lawyer were debating the
question of going through Mrs. Inglethorp’s papers.

“Do you think Mrs. Inglethorp made a will leaving all her money to Miss
Howard?” I asked in a low voice, with some curiosity.

Poirot smiled.

“No.”

“Then why did you ask?”

“Hush!”

John Cavendish had turned to Poirot.

“Will you come with us, Monsieur Poirot? We are going through my
mother’s papers. Mr. Inglethorp is quite willing to leave it entirely
to Mr. Wells and myself.”

“Which simplifies matters very much,” murmured the lawyer. “As
technically, of course, he was entitled——” He did not finish the
sentence.

“We will look through the desk in the boudoir first,” explained John,
“and go up to her bedroom afterwards. She kept her most important
papers in a purple despatch-case, which we must look through
carefully.”

“Yes,” said the lawyer, “it is quite possible that there may be a later
will than the one in my possession.”

“There _is_ a later will.” It was Poirot who spoke.

“What?” John and the lawyer looked at him startled.

“Or, rather,” pursued my friend imperturbably, “there _was_ one.”

“What do you mean—there was one? Where is it now?”

“Burnt!”

“Burnt?”

“Yes. See here.” He took out the charred fragment we had found in the
grate in Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, and handed it to the lawyer with a
brief explanation of when and where he had found it.

“But possibly this is an old will?”

“I do not think so. In fact I am almost certain that it was made no
earlier than yesterday afternoon.”

“What?” “Impossible!” broke simultaneously from both men.

Poirot turned to John.

“If you will allow me to send for your gardener, I will prove it to
you.”

“Oh, of course—but I don’t see——”

Poirot raised his hand.

“Do as I ask you. Afterwards you shall question as much as you please.”

“Very well.” He rang the bell.

Dorcas answered it in due course.

“Dorcas, will you tell Manning to come round and speak to me here.”

“Yes, sir.”

Dorcas withdrew.

We waited in a tense silence. Poirot alone seemed perfectly at his
ease, and dusted a forgotten corner of the bookcase.

The clumping of hobnailed boots on the gravel outside proclaimed the
approach of Manning. John looked questioningly at Poirot. The latter
nodded.

“Come inside, Manning,” said John, “I want to speak to you.”

Manning came slowly and hesitatingly through the French window, and
stood as near it as he could. He held his cap in his hands, twisting it
very carefully round and round. His back was much bent, though he was
probably not as old as he looked, but his eyes were sharp and
intelligent, and belied his slow and rather cautious speech.

“Manning,” said John, “this gentleman will put some questions to you
which I want you to answer.”

“Yessir,” mumbled Manning.

Poirot stepped forward briskly. Manning’s eye swept over him with a
faint contempt.

“You were planting a bed of begonias round by the south side of the
house yesterday afternoon, were you not, Manning?”

“Yes, sir, me and Willum.”

“And Mrs. Inglethorp came to the window and called you, did she not?”

“Yes, sir, she did.”

“Tell me in your own words exactly what happened after that.”

“Well, sir, nothing much. She just told Willum to go on his bicycle
down to the village, and bring back a form of will, or such-like—I
don’t know what exactly—she wrote it down for him.”

“Well?”

“Well, he did, sir.”

“And what happened next?”

“We went on with the begonias, sir.”

“Did not Mrs. Inglethorp call you again?”

“Yes, sir, both me and Willum, she called.”

“And then?”

“She made us come right in, and sign our names at the bottom of a long
paper—under where she’d signed.”

“Did you see anything of what was written above her signature?” asked
Poirot sharply.

“No, sir, there was a bit of blotting paper over that part.”

“And you signed where she told you?”

“Yes, sir, first me and then Willum.”

“What did she do with it afterwards?”

“Well, sir, she slipped it into a long envelope, and put it inside a
sort of purple box that was standing on the desk.”

“What time was it when she first called you?”

“About four, I should say, sir.”

“Not earlier? Couldn’t it have been about half-past three?”

“No, I shouldn’t say so, sir. It would be more likely to be a bit after
four—not before it.”

“Thank you, Manning, that will do,” said Poirot pleasantly.

The gardener glanced at his master, who nodded, whereupon Manning
lifted a finger to his forehead with a low mumble, and backed
cautiously out of the window.

We all looked at each other.

“Good heavens!” murmured John. “What an extraordinary coincidence.”

“How—a coincidence?”

“That my mother should have made a will on the very day of her death!”

Mr. Wells cleared his throat and remarked drily:

“Are you so sure it is a coincidence, Cavendish?”

“What do you mean?”

“Your mother, you tell me, had a violent quarrel with—someone yesterday
afternoon——”

“What do you mean?” cried John again. There was a tremor in his voice,
and he had gone very pale.

“In consequence of that quarrel, your mother very suddenly and
hurriedly makes a new will. The contents of that will we shall never
know. She told no one of its provisions. This morning, no doubt, she
would have consulted me on the subject—but she had no chance. The will
disappears, and she takes its secret with her to her grave. Cavendish,
I much fear there is no coincidence there. Monsieur Poirot, I am sure
you agree with me that the facts are very suggestive.”

“Suggestive, or not,” interrupted John, “we are most grateful to
Monsieur Poirot for elucidating the matter. But for him, we should
never have known of this will. I suppose, I may not ask you, monsieur,
what first led you to suspect the fact?”

Poirot smiled and answered:

“A scribbled over old envelope, and a freshly planted bed of begonias.”

John, I think, would have pressed his questions further, but at that
moment the loud purr of a motor was audible, and we all turned to the
window as it swept past.

“Evie!” cried John. “Excuse me, Wells.” He went hurriedly out into the
hall.

Poirot looked inquiringly at me.

“Miss Howard,” I explained.

“Ah, I am glad she has come. There is a woman with a head and a heart
too, Hastings. Though the good God gave her no beauty!”

I followed John’s example, and went out into the hall, where Miss
Howard was endeavouring to extricate herself from the voluminous mass
of veils that enveloped her head. As her eyes fell on me, a sudden pang
of guilt shot through me. This was the woman who had warned me so
earnestly, and to whose warning I had, alas, paid no heed! How soon,
and how contemptuously, I had dismissed it from my mind. Now that she
had been proved justified in so tragic a manner, I felt ashamed. She
had known Alfred Inglethorp only too well. I wondered whether, if she
had remained at Styles, the tragedy would have taken place, or would
the man have feared her watchful eyes?

I was relieved when she shook me by the hand, with her well remembered
painful grip. The eyes that met mine were sad, but not reproachful;
that she had been crying bitterly, I could tell by the redness of her
eyelids, but her manner was unchanged from its old gruffness.

“Started the moment I got the wire. Just come off night duty. Hired
car. Quickest way to get here.”

“Have you had anything to eat this morning, Evie?” asked John.

“No.”

“I thought not. Come along, breakfast’s not cleared away yet, and
they’ll make you some fresh tea.” He turned to me. “Look after her,
Hastings, will you? Wells is waiting for me. Oh, here’s Monsieur
Poirot. He’s helping us, you know, Evie.”

Miss Howard shook hands with Poirot, but glanced suspiciously over her
shoulder at John.

“What do you mean—helping us?”

“Helping us to investigate.”

“Nothing to investigate. Have they taken him to prison yet?”

“Taken who to prison?”

“Who? Alfred Inglethorp, of course!”

“My dear Evie, do be careful. Lawrence is of the opinion that my mother
died from heart seizure.”

“More fool, Lawrence!” retorted Miss Howard. “Of course Alfred
Inglethorp murdered poor Emily—as I always told you he would.”

“My dear Evie, don’t shout so. Whatever we may think or suspect, it is
better to say as little as possible for the present. The inquest isn’t
until Friday.”

“Not until fiddlesticks!” The snort Miss Howard gave was truly
magnificent. “You’re all off your heads. The man will be out of the
country by then. If he’s any sense, he won’t stay here tamely and wait
to be hanged.”

John Cavendish looked at her helplessly.

“I know what it is,” she accused him, “you’ve been listening to the
doctors. Never should. What do they know? Nothing at all—or just enough
to make them dangerous. I ought to know—my own father was a doctor.
That little Wilkins is about the greatest fool that even I have ever
seen. Heart seizure! Sort of thing he would say. Anyone with any sense
could see at once that her husband had poisoned her. I always said he’d
murder her in her bed, poor soul. Now he’s done it. And all you can do
is to murmur silly things about ‘heart seizure’ and ‘inquest on
Friday.’ You ought to be ashamed of yourself, John Cavendish.”

“What do you want me to do?” asked John, unable to help a faint smile.
“Dash it all, Evie, I can’t haul him down to the local police station
by the scruff of his neck.”

“Well, you might do something. Find out how he did it. He’s a crafty
beggar. Dare say he soaked fly papers. Ask cook if she’s missed any.”

It occurred to me very forcibly at that moment that to harbour Miss
Howard and Alfred Inglethorp under the same roof, and keep the peace
between them, was likely to prove a Herculean task, and I did not envy
John. I could see by the expression of his face that he fully
appreciated the difficulty of the position. For the moment, he sought
refuge in retreat, and left the room precipitately.

Dorcas brought in fresh tea. As she left the room, Poirot came over
from the window where he had been standing, and sat down facing Miss
Howard.

“Mademoiselle,” he said gravely, “I want to ask you something.”

“Ask away,” said the lady, eyeing him with some disfavour.

“I want to be able to count upon your help.”

“I’ll help you to hang Alfred with pleasure,” she replied gruffly.
“Hanging’s too good for him. Ought to be drawn and quartered, like in
good old times.”

“We are at one then,” said Poirot, “for I, too, want to hang the
criminal.”

“Alfred Inglethorp?”

“Him, or another.”

“No question of another. Poor Emily was never murdered until _he_ came
along. I don’t say she wasn’t surrounded by sharks—she was. But it was
only her purse they were after. Her life was safe enough. But along
comes Mr. Alfred Inglethorp—and within two months—hey presto!”

“Believe me, Miss Howard,” said Poirot very earnestly, “if Mr.
Inglethorp is the man, he shall not escape me. On my honour, I will
hang him as high as Haman!”

“That’s better,” said Miss Howard more enthusiastically.

“But I must ask you to trust me. Now your help may be very valuable to
me. I will tell you why. Because, in all this house of mourning, yours
are the only eyes that have wept.”

Miss Howard blinked, and a new note crept into the gruffness of her
voice.

“If you mean that I was fond of her—yes, I was. You know, Emily was a
selfish old woman in her way. She was very generous, but she always
wanted a return. She never let people forget what she had done for
them—and, that way she missed love. Don’t think she ever realized it,
though, or felt the lack of it. Hope not, anyway. I was on a different
footing. I took my stand from the first. ‘So many pounds a year I’m
worth to you. Well and good. But not a penny piece besides—not a pair
of gloves, nor a theatre ticket.’ She didn’t understand—was very
offended sometimes. Said I was foolishly proud. It wasn’t that—but I
couldn’t explain. Anyway, I kept my self-respect. And so, out of the
whole bunch, I was the only one who could allow myself to be fond of
her. I watched over her. I guarded her from the lot of them, and then a
glib-tongued scoundrel comes along, and pooh! all my years of devotion
go for nothing.”

Poirot nodded sympathetically.

“I understand, mademoiselle, I understand all you feel. It is most
natural. You think that we are lukewarm—that we lack fire and
energy—but trust me, it is not so.”

John stuck his head in at this juncture, and invited us both to come up
to Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, as he and Mr. Wells had finished looking
through the desk in the boudoir.

As we went up the stairs, John looked back to the dining-room door, and
lowered his voice confidentially:

“Look here, what’s going to happen when these two meet?”

I shook my head helplessly.

“I’ve told Mary to keep them apart if she can.”

“Will she be able to do so?”

“The Lord only knows. There’s one thing, Inglethorp himself won’t be
too keen on meeting her.”

“You’ve got the keys still, haven’t you, Poirot?” I asked, as we
reached the door of the locked room.

Taking the keys from Poirot, John unlocked it, and we all passed in.
The lawyer went straight to the desk, and John followed him.

“My mother kept most of her important papers in this despatch-case, I
believe,” he said.

Poirot drew out the small bunch of keys.

“Permit me. I locked it, out of precaution, this morning.”

“But it’s not locked now.”

“Impossible!”

“See.” And John lifted the lid as he spoke.

“_Milles tonnerres!_” cried Poirot, dumbfounded. “And I—who have both
the keys in my pocket!” He flung himself upon the case. Suddenly he
stiffened. “_Eh voilà une affaire!_ This lock has been forced.”

“What?”

Poirot laid down the case again.

“But who forced it? Why should they? When? But the door was locked?”
These exclamations burst from us disjointedly.

Poirot answered them categorically—almost mechanically.

“Who? That is the question. Why? Ah, if I only knew. When? Since I was
here an hour ago. As to the door being locked, it is a very ordinary
lock. Probably any other of the doorkeys in this passage would fit it.”

We stared at one another blankly. Poirot had walked over to the
mantelpiece. He was outwardly calm, but I noticed his hands, which from
long force of habit were mechanically straightening the spill vases on
the mantelpiece, were shaking violently.

“See here, it was like this,” he said at last. “There was something in
that case—some piece of evidence, slight in itself perhaps, but still
enough of a clue to connect the murderer with the crime. It was vital
to him that it should be destroyed before it was discovered and its
significance appreciated. Therefore, he took the risk, the great risk,
of coming in here. Finding the case locked, he was obliged to force it,
thus betraying his presence. For him to take that risk, it must have
been something of great importance.”

“But what was it?”

“Ah!” cried Poirot, with a gesture of anger. “That, I do not know! A
document of some kind, without doubt, possibly the scrap of paper
Dorcas saw in her hand yesterday afternoon. And I—” his anger burst
forth freely—“miserable animal that I am! I guessed nothing! I have
behaved like an imbecile! I should never have left that case here. I
should have carried it away with me. Ah, triple pig! And now it is
gone. It is destroyed—but is it destroyed? Is there not yet a chance—we
must leave no stone unturned—”

He rushed like a madman from the room, and I followed him as soon as I
had sufficiently recovered my wits. But, by the time I had reached the
top of the stairs, he was out of sight.

Mary Cavendish was standing where the staircase branched, staring down
into the hall in the direction in which he had disappeared.

“What has happened to your extraordinary little friend, Mr. Hastings?
He has just rushed past me like a mad bull.”

“He’s rather upset about something,” I remarked feebly. I really did
not know how much Poirot would wish me to disclose. As I saw a faint
smile gather on Mrs. Cavendish’s expressive mouth, I endeavoured to try
and turn the conversation by saying: “They haven’t met yet, have they?”

“Who?”

“Mr. Inglethorp and Miss Howard.”

She looked at me in rather a disconcerting manner.

“Do you think it would be such a disaster if they did meet?”

“Well, don’t you?” I said, rather taken aback.

“No.” She was smiling in her quiet way. “I should like to see a good
flare up. It would clear the air. At present we are all thinking so
much, and saying so little.”

“John doesn’t think so,” I remarked. “He’s anxious to keep them apart.”

“Oh, John!”

Something in her tone fired me, and I blurted out:

“Old John’s an awfully good sort.”

She studied me curiously for a minute or two, and then said, to my
great surprise:

“You are loyal to your friend. I like you for that.”

“Aren’t you my friend too?”

“I am a very bad friend.”

“Why do you say that?”

“Because it is true. I am charming to my friends one day, and forget
all about them the next.”

I don’t know what impelled me, but I was nettled, and I said foolishly
and not in the best of taste:

“Yet you seem to be invariably charming to Dr. Bauerstein!”

Instantly I regretted my words. Her face stiffened. I had the
impression of a steel curtain coming down and blotting out the real
woman. Without a word, she turned and went swiftly up the stairs,
whilst I stood like an idiot gaping after her.

I was recalled to other matters by a frightful row going on below. I
could hear Poirot shouting and expounding. I was vexed to think that my
diplomacy had been in vain. The little man appeared to be taking the
whole house into his confidence, a proceeding of which I, for one,
doubted the wisdom. Once again I could not help regretting that my
friend was so prone to lose his head in moments of excitement. I
stepped briskly down the stairs. The sight of me calmed Poirot almost
immediately. I drew him aside.

“My dear fellow,” I said, “is this wise? Surely you don’t want the
whole house to know of this occurrence? You are actually playing into
the criminal’s hands.”

“You think so, Hastings?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Well, well, my friend, I will be guided by you.”

“Good. Although, unfortunately, it is a little too late now.”

“Sure.”

He looked so crestfallen and abashed that I felt quite sorry, though I
still thought my rebuke a just and wise one.

“Well,” he said at last, “let us go, _mon ami_.”

“You have finished here?”

“For the moment, yes. You will walk back with me to the village?”

“Willingly.”

He picked up his little suit-case, and we went out through the open
window in the drawing-room. Cynthia Murdoch was just coming in, and
Poirot stood aside to let her pass.

“Excuse me, mademoiselle, one minute.”

“Yes?” she turned inquiringly.

“Did you ever make up Mrs. Inglethorp’s medicines?”

A slight flush rose in her face, as she answered rather constrainedly:

“No.”

“Only her powders?”

The flush deepened as Cynthia replied:

“Oh, yes, I did make up some sleeping powders for her once.”

“These?”

Poirot produced the empty box which had contained powders.

She nodded.

“Can you tell me what they were? Sulphonal? Veronal?”

“No, they were bromide powders.”

“Ah! Thank you, mademoiselle; good morning.”

As we walked briskly away from the house, I glanced at him more than
once. I had often before noticed that, if anything excited him, his
eyes turned green like a cat’s. They were shining like emeralds now.

“My friend,” he broke out at last, “I have a little idea, a very
strange, and probably utterly impossible idea. And yet—it fits in.”

I shrugged my shoulders. I privately thought that Poirot was rather too
much given to these fantastic ideas. In this case, surely, the truth
was only too plain and apparent.

“So that is the explanation of the blank label on the box,” I remarked.
“Very simple, as you said. I really wonder that I did not think of it
myself.”

Poirot did not appear to be listening to me.

“They have made one more discovery, _là-bas_,” he observed, jerking his
thumb over his shoulder in the direction of Styles. “Mr. Wells told me
as we were going upstairs.”

“What was it?”

“Locked up in the desk in the boudoir, they found a will of Mrs.
Inglethorp’s, dated before her marriage, leaving her fortune to Alfred
Inglethorp. It must have been made just at the time they were engaged.
It came quite as a surprise to Wells—and to John Cavendish also. It was
written on one of those printed will forms, and witnessed by two of the
servants—not Dorcas.”

“Did Mr. Inglethorp know of it?”

“He says not.”

“One might take that with a grain of salt,” I remarked sceptically.
“All these wills are very confusing. Tell me, how did those scribbled
words on the envelope help you to discover that a will was made
yesterday afternoon?”

Poirot smiled.

“_Mon ami_, have you ever, when writing a letter, been arrested by the
fact that you did not know how to spell a certain word?”

“Yes, often. I suppose everyone has.”

“Exactly. And have you not, in such a case, tried the word once or
twice on the edge of the blotting-paper, or a spare scrap of paper, to
see if it looked right? Well, that is what Mrs. Inglethorp did. You
will notice that the word ‘possessed’ is spelt first with one ‘s’ and
subsequently with two—correctly. To make sure, she had further tried it
in a sentence, thus: ‘I am possessed.’ Now, what did that tell me? It
told me that Mrs. Inglethorp had been writing the word ‘possessed’ that
afternoon, and, having the fragment of paper found in the grate fresh
in my mind, the possibility of a will—(a document almost certain to
contain that word)—occurred to me at once. This possibility was
confirmed by a further circumstance. In the general confusion, the
boudoir had not been swept that morning, and near the desk were several
traces of brown mould and earth. The weather had been perfectly fine
for some days, and no ordinary boots would have left such a heavy
deposit.

“I strolled to the window, and saw at once that the begonia beds had
been newly planted. The mould in the beds was exactly similar to that
on the floor of the boudoir, and also I learnt from you that they _had_
been planted yesterday afternoon. I was now sure that one, or possibly
both of the gardeners—for there were two sets of footprints in the
bed—had entered the boudoir, for if Mrs. Inglethorp had merely wished
to speak to them she would in all probability have stood at the window,
and they would not have come into the room at all. I was now quite
convinced that she had made a fresh will, and had called the two
gardeners in to witness her signature. Events proved that I was right
in my supposition.”

“That was very ingenious,” I could not help admitting. “I must confess
that the conclusions I drew from those few scribbled words were quite
erroneous.”

He smiled.

“You gave too much rein to your imagination. Imagination is a good
servant, and a bad master. The simplest explanation is always the most
likely.”

“Another point—how did you know that the key of the despatch-case had
been lost?”

“I did not know it. It was a guess that turned out to be correct. You
observed that it had a piece of twisted wire through the handle. That
suggested to me at once that it had possibly been wrenched off a flimsy
key-ring. Now, if it had been lost and recovered, Mrs. Inglethorp would
at once have replaced it on her bunch; but on her bunch I found what
was obviously the duplicate key, very new and bright, which led me to
the hypothesis that somebody else had inserted the original key in the
lock of the despatch-case.”

“Yes,” I said, “Alfred Inglethorp, without doubt.”

Poirot looked at me curiously.

“You are very sure of his guilt?”

“Well, naturally. Every fresh circumstance seems to establish it more
clearly.”

“On the contrary,” said Poirot quietly, “there are several points in
his favour.”

“Oh, come now!”

“Yes.”

“I see only one.”

“And that?”

“That he was not in the house last night.”

“‘Bad shot!’ as you English say! You have chosen the one point that to
my mind tells against him.”

“How is that?”

“Because if Mr. Inglethorp knew that his wife would be poisoned last
night, he would certainly have arranged to be away from the house. His
excuse was an obviously trumped up one. That leaves us two
possibilities: either he knew what was going to happen or he had a
reason of his own for his absence.”

“And that reason?” I asked sceptically.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“How should I know? Discreditable, without doubt. This Mr. Inglethorp,
I should say, is somewhat of a scoundrel—but that does not of necessity
make him a murderer.”

I shook my head, unconvinced.

“We do not agree, eh?” said Poirot. “Well, let us leave it. Time will
show which of us is right. Now let us turn to other aspects of the
case. What do you make of the fact that all the doors of the bedroom
were bolted on the inside?”

“Well——” I considered. “One must look at it logically.”

“True.”

“I should put it this way. The doors _were_ bolted—our own eyes have
told us that—yet the presence of the candle grease on the floor, and
the destruction of the will, prove that during the night someone
entered the room. You agree so far?”

“Perfectly. Put with admirable clearness. Proceed.”

“Well,” I said, encouraged, “as the person who entered did not do so by
the window, nor by miraculous means, it follows that the door must have
been opened from inside by Mrs. Inglethorp herself. That strengthens
the conviction that the person in question was her husband. She would
naturally open the door to her own husband.”

Poirot shook his head.

“Why should she? She had bolted the door leading into his room—a most
unusual proceeding on her part—she had had a most violent quarrel with
him that very afternoon. No, he was the last person she would admit.”

“But you agree with me that the door must have been opened by Mrs.
Inglethorp herself?”

“There is another possibility. She may have forgotten to bolt the door
into the passage when she went to bed, and have got up later, towards
morning, and bolted it then.”

“Poirot, is that seriously your opinion?”

“No, I do not say it is so, but it might be. Now, to turn to another
feature, what do you make of the scrap of conversation you overheard
between Mrs. Cavendish and her mother-in-law?”

“I had forgotten that,” I said thoughtfully. “That is as enigmatical as
ever. It seems incredible that a woman like Mrs. Cavendish, proud and
reticent to the last degree, should interfere so violently in what was
certainly not her affair.”

“Precisely. It was an astonishing thing for a woman of her breeding to
do.”

“It is certainly curious,” I agreed. “Still, it is unimportant, and
need not be taken into account.”

A groan burst from Poirot.

“What have I always told you? Everything must be taken into account. If
the fact will not fit the theory—let the theory go.”

“Well, we shall see,” I said, nettled.

“Yes, we shall see.”

We had reached Leastways Cottage, and Poirot ushered me upstairs to his
own room. He offered me one of the tiny Russian cigarettes he himself
occasionally smoked. I was amused to notice that he stowed away the
used matches most carefully in a little china pot. My momentary
annoyance vanished.

Poirot had placed our two chairs in front of the open window which
commanded a view of the village street. The fresh air blew in warm and
pleasant. It was going to be a hot day.

Suddenly my attention was arrested by a weedy looking young man rushing
down the street at a great pace. It was the expression on his face that
was extraordinary—a curious mingling of terror and agitation.

“Look, Poirot!” I said.

He leant forward.

“_Tiens!_” he said. “It is Mr. Mace, from the chemist’s shop. He is
coming here.”

The young man came to a halt before Leastways Cottage, and, after
hesitating a moment, pounded vigorously at the door.

“A little minute,” cried Poirot from the window. “I come.”

Motioning to me to follow him, he ran swiftly down the stairs and
opened the door. Mr. Mace began at once.

“Oh, Mr. Poirot, I’m sorry for the inconvenience, but I heard that
you’d just come back from the Hall?”

“Yes, we have.”

The young man moistened his dry lips. His face was working curiously.

“It’s all over the village about old Mrs. Inglethorp dying so suddenly.
They do say—” he lowered his voice cautiously—“that it’s poison?”

Poirot’s face remained quite impassive.

“Only the doctors can tell us that, Mr. Mace.”

“Yes, exactly—of course——” The young man hesitated, and then his
agitation was too much for him. He clutched Poirot by the arm, and sank
his voice to a whisper: “Just tell me this, Mr. Poirot, it isn’t—it
isn’t strychnine, is it?”

I hardly heard what Poirot replied. Something evidently of a
non-committal nature. The young man departed, and as he closed the door
Poirot’s eyes met mine.

“Yes,” he said, nodding gravely. “He will have evidence to give at the
inquest.”

We went slowly upstairs again. I was opening my lips, when Poirot
stopped me with a gesture of his hand.

“Not now, not now, _mon ami_. I have need of reflection. My mind is in
some disorder—which is not well.”

For about ten minutes he sat in dead silence, perfectly still, except
for several expressive motions of his eyebrows, and all the time his
eyes grew steadily greener. At last he heaved a deep sigh.

“It is well. The bad moment has passed. Now all is arranged and
classified. One must never permit confusion. The case is not clear
yet—no. For it is of the most complicated! It puzzles _me_. _Me_,
Hercule Poirot! There are two facts of significance.”

“And what are they?”

“The first is the state of the weather yesterday. That is very
important.”

“But it was a glorious day!” I interrupted. “Poirot, you’re pulling my
leg!”

“Not at all. The thermometer registered 80 degrees in the shade. Do not
forget that, my friend. It is the key to the whole riddle!”

“And the second point?” I asked.

“The important fact that Monsieur Inglethorp wears very peculiar
clothes, has a black beard, and uses glasses.”

“Poirot, I cannot believe you are serious.”

“I am absolutely serious, my friend.”

“But this is childish!”

“No, it is very momentous.”

“And supposing the Coroner’s jury returns a verdict of Wilful Murder
against Alfred Inglethorp. What becomes of your theories, then?”

“They would not be shaken because twelve stupid men had happened to
make a mistake! But that will not occur. For one thing, a country jury
is not anxious to take responsibility upon itself, and Mr. Inglethorp
stands practically in the position of local squire. Also,” he added
placidly, “_I_ should not allow it!”

“_You_ would not allow it?”

“No.”

I looked at the extraordinary little man, divided between annoyance and
amusement. He was so tremendously sure of himself. As though he read my
thoughts, he nodded gently.

“Oh, yes, _mon ami_, I would do what I say.” He got up and laid his
hand on my shoulder. His physiognomy underwent a complete change. Tears
came into his eyes. “In all this, you see, I think of that poor Mrs.
Inglethorp who is dead. She was not extravagantly loved—no. But she was
very good to us Belgians—I owe her a debt.”

I endeavoured to interrupt, but Poirot swept on.

“Let me tell you this, Hastings. She would never forgive me if I let
Alfred Inglethorp, her husband, be arrested _now_—when a word from me
could save him!”




CHAPTER VI.
THE INQUEST


In the interval before the inquest, Poirot was unfailing in his
activity. Twice he was closeted with Mr. Wells. He also took long walks
into the country. I rather resented his not taking me into his
confidence, the more so as I could not in the least guess what he was
driving at.

It occurred to me that he might have been making inquiries at Raikes’s
farm; so, finding him out when I called at Leastways Cottage on
Wednesday evening, I walked over there by the fields, hoping to meet
him. But there was no sign of him, and I hesitated to go right up to
the farm itself. As I walked away, I met an aged rustic, who leered at
me cunningly.

“You’m from the Hall, bain’t you?” he asked.

“Yes. I’m looking for a friend of mine whom I thought might have walked
this way.”

“A little chap? As waves his hands when he talks? One of them Belgies
from the village?”

“Yes,” I said eagerly. “He has been here, then?”

“Oh, ay, he’s been here, right enough. More’n once too. Friend of
yours, is he? Ah, you gentlemen from the Hall—you’m a pretty lot!” And
he leered more jocosely than ever.

“Why, do the gentlemen from the Hall come here often?” I asked, as
carelessly as I could.

He winked at me knowingly.

“_One_ does, mister. Naming no names, mind. And a very liberal
gentleman too! Oh, thank you, sir, I’m sure.”

I walked on sharply. Evelyn Howard had been right then, and I
experienced a sharp twinge of disgust, as I thought of Alfred
Inglethorp’s liberality with another woman’s money. Had that piquant
gipsy face been at the bottom of the crime, or was it the baser
mainspring of money? Probably a judicious mixture of both.

On one point, Poirot seemed to have a curious obsession. He once or
twice observed to me that he thought Dorcas must have made an error in
fixing the time of the quarrel. He suggested to her repeatedly that it
was four-thirty, and not four o’clock when she had heard the voices.

But Dorcas was unshaken. Quite an hour, or even more, had elapsed
between the time when she had heard the voices and five o’clock, when
she had taken tea to her mistress.

The inquest was held on Friday at the Stylites Arms in the village.
Poirot and I sat together, not being required to give evidence.

The preliminaries were gone through. The jury viewed the body, and John
Cavendish gave evidence of identification.

Further questioned, he described his awakening in the early hours of
the morning, and the circumstances of his mother’s death.

The medical evidence was next taken. There was a breathless hush, and
every eye was fixed on the famous London specialist, who was known to
be one of the greatest authorities of the day on the subject of
toxicology.

In a few brief words, he summed up the result of the post-mortem. Shorn
of its medical phraseology and technicalities, it amounted to the fact
that Mrs. Inglethorp had met her death as the result of strychnine
poisoning. Judging from the quantity recovered, she must have taken not
less than three-quarters of a grain of strychnine, but probably one
grain or slightly over.

“Is it possible that she could have swallowed the poison by accident?”
asked the Coroner.

“I should consider it very unlikely. Strychnine is not used for
domestic purposes, as some poisons are, and there are restrictions
placed on its sale.”

“Does anything in your examination lead you to determine how the poison
was administered?”

“No.”

“You arrived at Styles before Dr. Wilkins, I believe?”

“That is so. The motor met me just outside the lodge gates, and I
hurried there as fast as I could.”

“Will you relate to us exactly what happened next?”

“I entered Mrs. Inglethorp’s room. She was at that moment in a typical
tetanic convulsion. She turned towards me, and gasped out:
‘Alfred—Alfred——’”

“Could the strychnine have been administered in Mrs. Inglethorp’s
after-dinner coffee which was taken to her by her husband?”

“Possibly, but strychnine is a fairly rapid drug in its action. The
symptoms appear from one to two hours after it has been swallowed. It
is retarded under certain conditions, none of which, however, appear to
have been present in this case. I presume Mrs. Inglethorp took the
coffee after dinner about eight o’clock, whereas the symptoms did not
manifest themselves until the early hours of the morning, which, on the
face of it, points to the drug having been taken much later in the
evening.”

“Mrs. Inglethorp was in the habit of drinking a cup of cocoa in the
middle of the night. Could the strychnine have been administered in
that?”

“No, I myself took a sample of the cocoa remaining in the saucepan and
had it analysed. There was no strychnine present.”

I heard Poirot chuckle softly beside me.

“How did you know?” I whispered.

“Listen.”

“I should say”—the doctor was continuing—“that I would have been
considerably surprised at any other result.”

“Why?”

“Simply because strychnine has an unusually bitter taste. It can be
detected in a solution of one in seventy thousand, and can only be
disguised by some strongly flavoured substance. Cocoa would be quite
powerless to mask it.”

One of the jury wanted to know if the same objection applied to coffee.

“No. Coffee has a bitter taste of its own which would probably cover
the taste of strychnine.”

“Then you consider it more likely that the drug was administered in the
coffee, but that for some unknown reason its action was delayed.”

“Yes, but, the cup being completely smashed, there is no possibility of
analyzing its contents.”

This concluded Dr. Bauerstein’s evidence. Dr. Wilkins corroborated it
on all points. Sounded as to the possibility of suicide, he repudiated
it utterly. The deceased, he said, suffered from a weak heart, but
otherwise enjoyed perfect health, and was of a cheerful and
well-balanced disposition. She would be one of the last people to take
her own life.

Lawrence Cavendish was next called. His evidence was quite unimportant,
being a mere repetition of that of his brother. Just as he was about to
step down, he paused, and said rather hesitatingly:

“I should like to make a suggestion if I may?”

He glanced deprecatingly at the Coroner, who replied briskly:

“Certainly, Mr. Cavendish, we are here to arrive at the truth of this
matter, and welcome anything that may lead to further elucidation.”

“It is just an idea of mine,” explained Lawrence. “Of course I may be
quite wrong, but it still seems to me that my mother’s death might be
accounted for by natural means.”

“How do you make that out, Mr. Cavendish?”

“My mother, at the time of her death, and for some time before it, was
taking a tonic containing strychnine.”

“Ah!” said the Coroner.

The jury looked up, interested.

“I believe,” continued Lawrence, “that there have been cases where the
cumulative effect of a drug, administered for some time, has ended by
causing death. Also, is it not possible that she may have taken an
overdose of her medicine by accident?”

“This is the first we have heard of the deceased taking strychnine at
the time of her death. We are much obliged to you, Mr. Cavendish.”

Dr. Wilkins was recalled and ridiculed the idea.

“What Mr. Cavendish suggests is quite impossible. Any doctor would tell
you the same. Strychnine is, in a certain sense, a cumulative poison,
but it would be quite impossible for it to result in sudden death in
this way. There would have to be a long period of chronic symptoms
which would at once have attracted my attention. The whole thing is
absurd.”

“And the second suggestion? That Mrs. Inglethorp may have inadvertently
taken an overdose?”

“Three, or even four doses, would not have resulted in death. Mrs.
Inglethorp always had an extra large amount of medicine made up at a
time, as she dealt with Coot’s, the Cash Chemists in Tadminster. She
would have had to take very nearly the whole bottle to account for the
amount of strychnine found at the post-mortem.”

“Then you consider that we may dismiss the tonic as not being in any
way instrumental in causing her death?”

“Certainly. The supposition is ridiculous.”

The same juryman who had interrupted before here suggested that the
chemist who made up the medicine might have committed an error.

“That, of course, is always possible,” replied the doctor.

But Dorcas, who was the next witness called, dispelled even that
possibility. The medicine had not been newly made up. On the contrary,
Mrs. Inglethorp had taken the last dose on the day of her death.

So the question of the tonic was finally abandoned, and the Coroner
proceeded with his task. Having elicited from Dorcas how she had been
awakened by the violent ringing of her mistress’s bell, and had
subsequently roused the household, he passed to the subject of the
quarrel on the preceding afternoon.

Dorcas’s evidence on this point was substantially what Poirot and I had
already heard, so I will not repeat it here.

The next witness was Mary Cavendish. She stood very upright, and spoke
in a low, clear, and perfectly composed voice. In answer to the
Coroner’s question, she told how, her alarm clock having aroused her at
four-thirty as usual, she was dressing, when she was startled by the
sound of something heavy falling.

“That would have been the table by the bed?” commented the Coroner.

“I opened my door,” continued Mary, “and listened. In a few minutes a
bell rang violently. Dorcas came running down and woke my husband, and
we all went to my mother-in-law’s room, but it was locked——”

The Coroner interrupted her.

“I really do not think we need trouble you further on that point. We
know all that can be known of the subsequent happenings. But I should
be obliged if you would tell us all you overheard of the quarrel the
day before.”

“I?”

There was a faint insolence in her voice. She raised her hand and
adjusted the ruffle of lace at her neck, turning her head a little as
she did so. And quite spontaneously the thought flashed across my mind:
“She is gaining time!”

“Yes. I understand,” continued the Coroner deliberately, “that you were
sitting reading on the bench just outside the long window of the
boudoir. That is so, is it not?”

This was news to me and glancing sideways at Poirot, I fancied that it
was news to him as well.

There was the faintest pause, the mere hesitation of a moment, before
she answered:

“Yes, that is so.”

“And the boudoir window was open, was it not?”

Surely her face grew a little paler as she answered:

“Yes.”

“Then you cannot have failed to hear the voices inside, especially as
they were raised in anger. In fact, they would be more audible where
you were than in the hall.”

“Possibly.”

“Will you repeat to us what you overheard of the quarrel?”

“I really do not remember hearing anything.”

“Do you mean to say you did not hear voices?”

“Oh, yes, I heard the voices, but I did not hear what they said.” A
faint spot of colour came into her cheek. “I am not in the habit of
listening to private conversations.”

The Coroner persisted.

“And you remember nothing at all? _Nothing_, Mrs. Cavendish? Not one
stray word or phrase to make you realize that it _was_ a private
conversation?”

She paused, and seemed to reflect, still outwardly as calm as ever.

“Yes; I remember. Mrs. Inglethorp said something—I do not remember
exactly what—about causing scandal between husband and wife.”

“Ah!” the Coroner leant back satisfied. “That corresponds with what
Dorcas heard. But excuse me, Mrs. Cavendish, although you realized it
was a private conversation, you did not move away? You remained where
you were?”

I caught the momentary gleam of her tawny eyes as she raised them. I
felt certain that at that moment she would willingly have torn the
little lawyer, with his insinuations, into pieces, but she replied
quietly enough:

“No. I was very comfortable where I was. I fixed my mind on my book.”

“And that is all you can tell us?”

“That is all.”

The examination was over, though I doubted if the Coroner was entirely
satisfied with it. I think he suspected that Mary Cavendish could tell
more if she chose.

Amy Hill, shop assistant, was next called, and deposed to having sold a
will form on the afternoon of the 17th to William Earl, under-gardener
at Styles.

William Earl and Manning succeeded her, and testified to witnessing a
document. Manning fixed the time at about four-thirty, William was of
the opinion that it was rather earlier.

Cynthia Murdoch came next. She had, however, little to tell. She had
known nothing of the tragedy, until awakened by Mrs. Cavendish.

“You did not hear the table fall?”

“No. I was fast asleep.”

The Coroner smiled.

“A good conscience makes a sound sleeper,” he observed. “Thank you,
Miss Murdoch, that is all.”

“Miss Howard.”

Miss Howard produced the letter written to her by Mrs. Inglethorp on
the evening of the 17th. Poirot and I had, of course already seen it.
It added nothing to our knowledge of the tragedy. The following is a
facsimile:

STYLES COURT
ESSEX
hand written note:

     July 17th
     My dear Evelyn
     Can we not bury
     the hachet? I have
     found it hard to forgive
     the things you said
     against my dear husband
     but I am an old woman
     & very fond of you
     Yours affectionately,
    Emily Inglethorpe


It was handed to the jury who scrutinized it attentively.

“I fear it does not help us much,” said the Coroner, with a sigh.
“There is no mention of any of the events of that afternoon.”

“Plain as a pikestaff to me,” said Miss Howard shortly. “It shows
clearly enough that my poor old friend had just found out she’d been
made a fool of!”

“It says nothing of the kind in the letter,” the Coroner pointed out.

“No, because Emily never could bear to put herself in the wrong. But
_I_ know her. She wanted me back. But she wasn’t going to own that I’d
been right. She went round about. Most people do. Don’t believe in it
myself.”

Mr. Wells smiled faintly. So, I noticed, did several of the jury. Miss
Howard was obviously quite a public character.

“Anyway, all this tomfoolery is a great waste of time,” continued the
lady, glancing up and down the jury disparagingly. “Talk—talk—talk!
When all the time we know perfectly well——”

The Coroner interrupted her in an agony of apprehension:

“Thank you, Miss Howard, that is all.”

I fancy he breathed a sigh of relief when she complied.

Then came the sensation of the day. The Coroner called Albert Mace,
chemist’s assistant.

It was our agitated young man of the pale face. In answer to the
Coroner’s questions, he explained that he was a qualified pharmacist,
but had only recently come to this particular shop, as the assistant
formerly there had just been called up for the army.

These preliminaries completed, the Coroner proceeded to business.

“Mr. Mace, have you lately sold strychnine to any unauthorized person?”

“Yes, sir.”

“When was this?”

“Last Monday night.”

“Monday? Not Tuesday?”

“No, sir, Monday, the 16th.”

“Will you tell us to whom you sold it?”

You could have heard a pin drop.

“Yes, sir. It was to Mr. Inglethorp.”

Every eye turned simultaneously to where Alfred Inglethorp was sitting,
impassive and wooden. He started slightly, as the damning words fell
from the young man’s lips. I half thought he was going to rise from his
chair, but he remained seated, although a remarkably well acted
expression of astonishment rose on his face.

“You are sure of what you say?” asked the Coroner sternly.

“Quite sure, sir.”

“Are you in the habit of selling strychnine indiscriminately over the
counter?”

The wretched young man wilted visibly under the Coroner’s frown.

“Oh, no, sir—of course not. But, seeing it was Mr. Inglethorp of the
Hall, I thought there was no harm in it. He said it was to poison a
dog.”

Inwardly I sympathized. It was only human nature to endeavour to please
“The Hall”—especially when it might result in custom being transferred
from Coot’s to the local establishment.

“Is it not customary for anyone purchasing poison to sign a book?”

“Yes, sir, Mr. Inglethorp did so.”

“Have you got the book here?”

“Yes, sir.”

It was produced; and, with a few words of stern censure, the Coroner
dismissed the wretched Mr. Mace.

Then, amidst a breathless silence, Alfred Inglethorp was called. Did he
realize, I wondered, how closely the halter was being drawn around his
neck?

The Coroner went straight to the point.

“On Monday evening last, did you purchase strychnine for the purpose of
poisoning a dog?”

Inglethorp replied with perfect calmness:

“No, I did not. There is no dog at Styles, except an outdoor sheepdog,
which is in perfect health.”

“You deny absolutely having purchased strychnine from Albert Mace on
Monday last?”

“I do.”

“Do you also deny _this_?”

The Coroner handed him the register in which his signature was
inscribed.

“Certainly I do. The hand-writing is quite different from mine. I will
show you.”

He took an old envelope out of his pocket, and wrote his name on it,
handing it to the jury. It was certainly utterly dissimilar.

“Then what is your explanation of Mr. Mace’s statement?”

Alfred Inglethorp replied imperturbably:

“Mr. Mace must have been mistaken.”

The Coroner hesitated for a moment, and then said:

“Mr. Inglethorp, as a mere matter of form, would you mind telling us
where you were on the evening of Monday, July 16th?”

“Really—I cannot remember.”

“That is absurd, Mr. Inglethorp,” said the Coroner sharply. “Think
again.”

Inglethorp shook his head.

“I cannot tell you. I have an idea that I was out walking.”

“In what direction?”

“I really can’t remember.”

The Coroner’s face grew graver.

“Were you in company with anyone?”

“No.”

“Did you meet anyone on your walk?”

“No.”

“That is a pity,” said the Coroner dryly. “I am to take it then that
you decline to say where you were at the time that Mr. Mace positively
recognized you as entering the shop to purchase strychnine?”

“If you like to take it that way, yes.”

“Be careful, Mr. Inglethorp.”

Poirot was fidgeting nervously.

“_Sacré!_” he murmured. “Does this imbecile of a man _want_ to be
arrested?”

Inglethorp was indeed creating a bad impression. His futile denials
would not have convinced a child. The Coroner, however, passed briskly
to the next point, and Poirot drew a deep breath of relief.

“You had a discussion with your wife on Tuesday afternoon?”

“Pardon me,” interrupted Alfred Inglethorp, “you have been misinformed.
I had no quarrel with my dear wife. The whole story is absolutely
untrue. I was absent from the house the entire afternoon.”

“Have you anyone who can testify to that?”

“You have my word,” said Inglethorp haughtily.

The Coroner did not trouble to reply.

“There are two witnesses who will swear to having heard your
disagreement with Mrs. Inglethorp.”

“Those witnesses were mistaken.”

I was puzzled. The man spoke with such quiet assurance that I was
staggered. I looked at Poirot. There was an expression of exultation on
his face which I could not understand. Was he at last convinced of
Alfred Inglethorp’s guilt?

“Mr. Inglethorp,” said the Coroner, “you have heard your wife’s dying
words repeated here. Can you explain them in any way?”

“Certainly I can.”

“You can?”

“It seems to me very simple. The room was dimly lighted. Dr. Bauerstein
is much of my height and build, and, like me, wears a beard. In the dim
light, and suffering as she was, my poor wife mistook him for me.”

“Ah!” murmured Poirot to himself. “But it is an idea, that!”

“You think it is true?” I whispered.

“I do not say that. But it is truly an ingenious supposition.”

“You read my wife’s last words as an accusation”—Inglethorp was
continuing—“they were, on the contrary, an appeal to me.”

The Coroner reflected a moment, then he said:

“I believe, Mr. Inglethorp, that you yourself poured out the coffee,
and took it to your wife that evening?”

“I poured it out, yes. But I did not take it to her. I meant to do so,
but I was told that a friend was at the hall door, so I laid down the
coffee on the hall table. When I came through the hall again a few
minutes later, it was gone.”

This statement might, or might not, be true, but it did not seem to me
to improve matters much for Inglethorp. In any case, he had had ample
time to introduce the poison.

At that point, Poirot nudged me gently, indicating two men who were
sitting together near the door. One was a little, sharp, dark,
ferret-faced man, the other was tall and fair.

I questioned Poirot mutely. He put his lips to my ear.

“Do you know who that little man is?”

I shook my head.

“That is Detective Inspector James Japp of Scotland Yard—Jimmy Japp.
The other man is from Scotland Yard too. Things are moving quickly, my
friend.”

I stared at the two men intently. There was certainly nothing of the
policeman about them. I should never have suspected them of being
official personages.

I was still staring, when I was startled and recalled by the verdict
being given:

“Wilful Murder against some person or persons unknown.”




CHAPTER VII.
POIROT PAYS HIS DEBTS


As we came out of the Stylites Arms, Poirot drew me aside by a gentle
pressure of the arm. I understood his object. He was waiting for the
Scotland Yard men.

In a few moments, they emerged, and Poirot at once stepped forward, and
accosted the shorter of the two.

“I fear you do not remember me, Inspector Japp.”

“Why, if it isn’t Mr. Poirot!” cried the Inspector. He turned to the
other man. “You’ve heard me speak of Mr. Poirot? It was in 1904 he and
I worked together—the Abercrombie forgery case—you remember, he was run
down in Brussels. Ah, those were great days, moosier. Then, do you
remember ‘Baron’ Altara? There was a pretty rogue for you! He eluded
the clutches of half the police in Europe. But we nailed him in
Antwerp—thanks to Mr. Poirot here.”

As these friendly reminiscences were being indulged in, I drew nearer,
and was introduced to Detective-Inspector Japp, who, in his turn,
introduced us both to his companion, Superintendent Summerhaye.

“I need hardly ask what you are doing here, gentlemen,” remarked
Poirot.

Japp closed one eye knowingly.

“No, indeed. Pretty clear case I should say.”

But Poirot answered gravely:

“There I differ from you.”

“Oh, come!” said Summerhaye, opening his lips for the first time.
“Surely the whole thing is clear as daylight. The man’s caught
red-handed. How he could be such a fool beats me!”

But Japp was looking attentively at Poirot.

“Hold your fire, Summerhaye,” he remarked jocularly. “Me and Moosier
here have met before—and there’s no man’s judgment I’d sooner take than
his. If I’m not greatly mistaken, he’s got something up his sleeve.
Isn’t that so, moosier?”

Poirot smiled.

“I have drawn certain conclusions—yes.”

Summerhaye was still looking rather sceptical, but Japp continued his
scrutiny of Poirot.

“It’s this way,” he said, “so far, we’ve only seen the case from the
outside. That’s where the Yard’s at a disadvantage in a case of this
kind, where the murder’s only out, so to speak, after the inquest. A
lot depends on being on the spot first thing, and that’s where Mr.
Poirot’s had the start of us. We shouldn’t have been here as soon as
this even, if it hadn’t been for the fact that there was a smart doctor
on the spot, who gave us the tip through the Coroner. But you’ve been
on the spot from the first, and you may have picked up some little
hints. From the evidence at the inquest, Mr. Inglethorp murdered his
wife as sure as I stand here, and if anyone but you hinted the contrary
I’d laugh in his face. I must say I was surprised the jury didn’t bring
it in Wilful Murder against him right off. I think they would have, if
it hadn’t been for the Coroner—he seemed to be holding them back.”

“Perhaps, though, you have a warrant for his arrest in your pocket
now,” suggested Poirot.

A kind of wooden shutter of officialdom came down from Japp’s
expressive countenance.

“Perhaps I have, and perhaps I haven’t,” he remarked dryly.

Poirot looked at him thoughtfully.

“I am very anxious, Messieurs, that he should not be arrested.”

“I dare say,” observed Summerhaye sarcastically.

Japp was regarding Poirot with comical perplexity.

“Can’t you go a little further, Mr. Poirot? A wink’s as good as a
nod—from you. You’ve been on the spot—and the Yard doesn’t want to make
any mistakes, you know.”

Poirot nodded gravely.

“That is exactly what I thought. Well, I will tell you this. Use your
warrant: Arrest Mr. Inglethorp. But it will bring you no kudos—the case
against him will be dismissed at once! _Comme ça!_” And he snapped his
fingers expressively.

Japp’s face grew grave, though Summerhaye gave an incredulous snort.

As for me, I was literally dumb with astonishment. I could only
conclude that Poirot was mad.

Japp had taken out a handkerchief, and was gently dabbing his brow.

“I daren’t do it, Mr. Poirot. _I_’d take your word, but there’s others
over me who’ll be asking what the devil I mean by it. Can’t you give me
a little more to go on?”

Poirot reflected a moment.

“It can be done,” he said at last. “I admit I do not wish it. It forces
my hand. I would have preferred to work in the dark just for the
present, but what you say is very just—the word of a Belgian policeman,
whose day is past, is not enough! And Alfred Inglethorp must not be
arrested. That I have sworn, as my friend Hastings here knows. See,
then, my good Japp, you go at once to Styles?”

“Well, in about half an hour. We’re seeing the Coroner and the doctor
first.”

“Good. Call for me in passing—the last house in the village. I will go
with you. At Styles, Mr. Inglethorp will give you, or if he refuses—as
is probable—I will give you such proofs that shall satisfy you that the
case against him could not possibly be sustained. Is that a bargain?”

“That’s a bargain,” said Japp heartily. “And, on behalf of the Yard,
I’m much obliged to you, though I’m bound to confess I can’t at present
see the faintest possible loop-hole in the evidence, but you always
were a marvel! So long, then, moosier.”

The two detectives strode away, Summerhaye with an incredulous grin on
his face.

“Well, my friend,” cried Poirot, before I could get in a word, “what do
you think? _Mon Dieu!_ I had some warm moments in that court; I did not
figure to myself that the man would be so pig-headed as to refuse to
say anything at all. Decidedly, it was the policy of an imbecile.”

“H’m! There are other explanations besides that of imbecility,” I
remarked. “For, if the case against him is true, how could he defend
himself except by silence?”

“Why, in a thousand ingenious ways,” cried Poirot. “See; say that it is
I who have committed this murder, I can think of seven most plausible
stories! Far more convincing than Mr. Inglethorp’s stony denials!”

I could not help laughing.

“My dear Poirot, I am sure you are capable of thinking of seventy! But,
seriously, in spite of what I heard you say to the detectives, you
surely cannot still believe in the possibility of Alfred Inglethorp’s
innocence?”

“Why not now as much as before? Nothing has changed.”

“But the evidence is so conclusive.”

“Yes, too conclusive.”

We turned in at the gate of Leastways Cottage, and proceeded up the now
familiar stairs.

“Yes, yes, too conclusive,” continued Poirot, almost to himself. “Real
evidence is usually vague and unsatisfactory. It has to be
examined—sifted. But here the whole thing is cut and dried. No, my
friend, this evidence has been very cleverly manufactured—so cleverly
that it has defeated its own ends.”

“How do you make that out?”

“Because, so long as the evidence against him was vague and intangible,
it was very hard to disprove. But, in his anxiety, the criminal has
drawn the net so closely that one cut will set Inglethorp free.”

I was silent. And in a minute or two, Poirot continued:

“Let us look at the matter like this. Here is a man, let us say, who
sets out to poison his wife. He has lived by his wits as the saying
goes. Presumably, therefore, he has some wits. He is not altogether a
fool. Well, how does he set about it? He goes boldly to the village
chemist’s and purchases strychnine under his own name, with a trumped
up story about a dog which is bound to be proved absurd. He does not
employ the poison that night. No, he waits until he has had a violent
quarrel with her, of which the whole household is cognisant, and which
naturally directs their suspicions upon him. He prepares no defence—no
shadow of an alibi, yet he knows the chemist’s assistant must
necessarily come forward with the facts. Bah! Do not ask me to believe
that any man could be so idiotic! Only a lunatic, who wished to commit
suicide by causing himself to be hanged, would act so!”

“Still—I do not see——” I began.

“Neither do I see. I tell you, _mon ami_, it puzzles me. _Me_—Hercule
Poirot!”

“But if you believe him innocent, how do you explain his buying the
strychnine?”

“Very simply. He did _not_ buy it.”

“But Mace recognized him!”

“I beg your pardon, he saw a man with a black beard like Mr.
Inglethorp’s, and wearing glasses like Mr. Inglethorp, and dressed in
Mr. Inglethorp’s rather noticeable clothes. He could not recognize a
man whom he had probably only seen in the distance, since, you
remember, he himself had only been in the village a fortnight, and Mrs.
Inglethorp dealt principally with Coot’s in Tadminster.”

“Then you think——”

“_Mon ami_, do you remember the two points I laid stress upon? Leave
the first one for the moment, what was the second?”

“The important fact that Alfred Inglethorp wears peculiar clothes, has
a black beard, and uses glasses,” I quoted.

“Exactly. Now suppose anyone wished to pass himself off as John or
Lawrence Cavendish. Would it be easy?”

“No,” I said thoughtfully. “Of course an actor——”

But Poirot cut me short ruthlessly.

“And why would it not be easy? I will tell you, my friend: Because they
are both clean-shaven men. To make up successfully as one of these two
in broad daylight, it would need an actor of genius, and a certain
initial facial resemblance. But in the case of Alfred Inglethorp, all
that is changed. His clothes, his beard, the glasses which hide his
eyes—those are the salient points about his personal appearance. Now,
what is the first instinct of the criminal? To divert suspicion from
himself, is it not so? And how can he best do that? By throwing it on
someone else. In this instance, there was a man ready to his hand.
Everybody was predisposed to believe in Mr. Inglethorp’s guilt. It was
a foregone conclusion that he would be suspected; but, to make it a
sure thing there must be tangible proof—such as the actual buying of
the poison, and that, with a man of the peculiar appearance of Mr.
Inglethorp, was not difficult. Remember, this young Mace had never
actually spoken to Mr. Inglethorp. How should he doubt that the man in
his clothes, with his beard and his glasses, was not Alfred
Inglethorp?”

“It may be so,” I said, fascinated by Poirot’s eloquence. “But, if that
was the case, why does he not say where he was at six o’clock on Monday
evening?”

“Ah, why indeed?” said Poirot, calming down. “If he were arrested, he
probably would speak, but I do not want it to come to that. I must make
him see the gravity of his position. There is, of course, something
discreditable behind his silence. If he did not murder his wife, he is,
nevertheless, a scoundrel, and has something of his own to conceal,
quite apart from the murder.”

“What can it be?” I mused, won over to Poirot’s views for the moment,
although still retaining a faint conviction that the obvious deduction
was the correct one.

“Can you not guess?” asked Poirot, smiling.

“No, can you?”

“Oh, yes, I had a little idea sometime ago—and it has turned out to be
correct.”

“You never told me,” I said reproachfully.

Poirot spread out his hands apologetically.

“Pardon me, _mon ami_, you were not precisely _sympathique_.” He turned
to me earnestly. “Tell me—you see now that he must not be arrested?”

“Perhaps,” I said doubtfully, for I was really quite indifferent to the
fate of Alfred Inglethorp, and thought that a good fright would do him
no harm.

Poirot, who was watching me intently, gave a sigh.

“Come, my friend,” he said, changing the subject, “apart from Mr.
Inglethorp, how did the evidence at the inquest strike you?”

“Oh, pretty much what I expected.”

“Did nothing strike you as peculiar about it?”

My thoughts flew to Mary Cavendish, and I hedged:

“In what way?”

“Well, Mr. Lawrence Cavendish’s evidence for instance?”

I was relieved.

“Oh, Lawrence! No, I don’t think so. He’s always a nervous chap.”

“His suggestion that his mother might have been poisoned accidentally
by means of the tonic she was taking, that did not strike you as
strange— _hein?_”

“No, I can’t say it did. The doctors ridiculed it of course. But it was
quite a natural suggestion for a layman to make.”

“But Monsieur Lawrence is not a layman. You told me yourself that he
had started by studying medicine, and that he had taken his degree.”

“Yes, that’s true. I never thought of that.” I was rather startled. “It
_is_ odd.”

Poirot nodded.

“From the first, his behaviour has been peculiar. Of all the household,
he alone would be likely to recognize the symptoms of strychnine
poisoning, and yet we find him the only member of the family to uphold
strenuously the theory of death from natural causes. If it had been
Monsieur John, I could have understood it. He has no technical
knowledge, and is by nature unimaginative. But Monsieur Lawrence—no!
And now, to-day, he puts forward a suggestion that he himself must have
known was ridiculous. There is food for thought in this, _mon ami!_”

“It’s very confusing,” I agreed.

“Then there is Mrs. Cavendish,” continued Poirot. “That’s another who
is not telling all she knows! What do you make of her attitude?”

“I don’t know what to make of it. It seems inconceivable that she
should be shielding Alfred Inglethorp. Yet that is what it looks like.”

Poirot nodded reflectively.

“Yes, it is queer. One thing is certain, she overheard a good deal more
of that ‘private conversation’ than she was willing to admit.”

“And yet she is the last person one would accuse of stooping to
eavesdrop!”

“Exactly. One thing her evidence _has_ shown me. I made a mistake.
Dorcas was quite right. The quarrel did take place earlier in the
afternoon, about four o’clock, as she said.”

I looked at him curiously. I had never understood his insistence on
that point.

“Yes, a good deal that was peculiar came out to-day,” continued Poirot.
“Dr. Bauerstein, now, what was _he_ doing up and dressed at that hour
in the morning? It is astonishing to me that no one commented on the
fact.”

“He has insomnia, I believe,” I said doubtfully.

“Which is a very good, or a very bad explanation,” remarked Poirot. “It
covers everything, and explains nothing. I shall keep my eye on our
clever Dr. Bauerstein.”

“Any more faults to find with the evidence?” I inquired satirically.

“_Mon ami_,” replied Poirot gravely, “when you find that people are not
telling you the truth—look out! Now, unless I am much mistaken, at the
inquest to-day only one—at most, two persons were speaking the truth
without reservation or subterfuge.”

“Oh, come now, Poirot! I won’t cite Lawrence, or Mrs. Cavendish. But
there’s John—and Miss Howard, surely they were speaking the truth?”

“Both of them, my friend? One, I grant you, but both——!”

His words gave me an unpleasant shock. Miss Howard’s evidence,
unimportant as it was, had been given in such a downright
straightforward manner that it had never occurred to me to doubt her
sincerity. Still, I had a great respect for Poirot’s sagacity—except on
the occasions when he was what I described to myself as “foolishly
pig-headed.”

“Do you really think so?” I asked. “Miss Howard had always seemed to me
so essentially honest—almost uncomfortably so.”

Poirot gave me a curious look, which I could not quite fathom. He
seemed to speak, and then checked himself.

“Miss Murdoch too,” I continued, “there’s nothing untruthful about
_her_.”

“No. But it was strange that she never heard a sound, sleeping next
door; whereas Mrs. Cavendish, in the other wing of the building,
distinctly heard the table fall.”

“Well, she’s young. And she sleeps soundly.”

“Ah, yes, indeed! She must be a famous sleeper, that one!”

I did not quite like the tone of his voice, but at that moment a smart
knock reached our ears, and looking out of the window we perceived the
two detectives waiting for us below.

Poirot seized his hat, gave a ferocious twist to his moustache, and,
carefully brushing an imaginary speck of dust from his sleeve, motioned
me to precede him down the stairs; there we joined the detectives and
set out for Styles.

I think the appearance of the two Scotland Yard men was rather a
shock—especially to John, though of course after the verdict, he had
realized that it was only a matter of time. Still, the presence of the
detectives brought the truth home to him more than anything else could
have done.

Poirot had conferred with Japp in a low tone on the way up, and it was
the latter functionary who requested that the household, with the
exception of the servants, should be assembled together in the
drawing-room. I realized the significance of this. It was up to Poirot
to make his boast good.

Personally, I was not sanguine. Poirot might have excellent reasons for
his belief in Inglethorp’s innocence, but a man of the type of
Summerhaye would require tangible proofs, and these I doubted if Poirot
could supply.

Before very long we had all trooped into the drawing-room, the door of
which Japp closed. Poirot politely set chairs for everyone. The
Scotland Yard men were the cynosure of all eyes. I think that for the
first time we realized that the thing was not a bad dream, but a
tangible reality. We had read of such things—now we ourselves were
actors in the drama. To-morrow the daily papers, all over England,
would blazon out the news in staring headlines:

“MYSTERIOUS TRAGEDY IN ESSEX”

    “WEALTHY LADY POISONED”


There would be pictures of Styles, snap-shots of “The family leaving
the Inquest”—the village photographer had not been idle! All the things
that one had read a hundred times—things that happen to other people,
not to oneself. And now, in this house, a murder had been committed. In
front of us were “the detectives in charge of the case.” The well-known
glib phraseology passed rapidly through my mind in the interval before
Poirot opened the proceedings.

I think everyone was a little surprised that it should be he and not
one of the official detectives who took the initiative.

“_Mesdames_ and _messieurs_,” said Poirot, bowing as though he were a
celebrity about to deliver a lecture, “I have asked you to come here
all together, for a certain object. That object, it concerns Mr. Alfred
Inglethorp.”

Inglethorp was sitting a little by himself—I think, unconsciously,
everyone had drawn his chair slightly away from him—and he gave a faint
start as Poirot pronounced his name.

“Mr. Inglethorp,” said Poirot, addressing him directly, “a very dark
shadow is resting on this house—the shadow of murder.”

Inglethorp shook his head sadly.

“My poor wife,” he murmured. “Poor Emily! It is terrible.”

“I do not think, monsieur,” said Poirot pointedly, “that you quite
realize how terrible it may be—for you.” And as Inglethorp did not
appear to understand, he added: “Mr. Inglethorp, you are standing in
very grave danger.”

The two detectives fidgeted. I saw the official caution “Anything you
say will be used in evidence against you,” actually hovering on
Summerhaye’s lips. Poirot went on.

“Do you understand now, monsieur?”

“No. What do you mean?”

“I mean,” said Poirot deliberately, “that you are suspected of
poisoning your wife.”

A little gasp ran round the circle at this plain speaking.

“Good heavens!” cried Inglethorp, starting up. “What a monstrous idea!
_I_—poison my dearest Emily!”

“I do not think”—Poirot watched him narrowly—“that you quite realize
the unfavourable nature of your evidence at the inquest. Mr.
Inglethorp, knowing what I have now told you, do you still refuse to
say where you were at six o’clock on Monday afternoon?”

With a groan, Alfred Inglethorp sank down again and buried his face in
his hands. Poirot approached and stood over him.

“Speak!” he cried menacingly.

With an effort, Inglethorp raised his face from his hands. Then, slowly
and deliberately, he shook his head.

“You will not speak?”

“No. I do not believe that anyone could be so monstrous as to accuse me
of what you say.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully, like a man whose mind is made up.

“_Soit!_” he said. “Then I must speak for you.”

Alfred Inglethorp sprang up again.

“You? How can you speak? You do not know——” he broke off abruptly.

Poirot turned to face us. “_Mesdames_ and _messieurs_! I speak! Listen!
I, Hercule Poirot, affirm that the man who entered the chemist’s shop,
and purchased strychnine at six o’clock on Monday last was not Mr.
Inglethorp, for at six o’clock on that day Mr. Inglethorp was escorting
Mrs. Raikes back to her home from a neighbouring farm. I can produce no
less than five witnesses to swear to having seen them together, either
at six or just after and, as you may know, the Abbey Farm, Mrs.
Raikes’s home, is at least two and a half miles distant from the
village. There is absolutely no question as to the alibi!”




CHAPTER VIII.
FRESH SUSPICIONS


There was a moment’s stupefied silence. Japp, who was the least
surprised of any of us, was the first to speak.

“My word,” he cried, “you’re the goods! And no mistake, Mr. Poirot!
These witnesses of yours are all right, I suppose?”

“_Voilà!_ I have prepared a list of them—names and addresses. You must
see them, of course. But you will find it all right.”

“I’m sure of that.” Japp lowered his voice. “I’m much obliged to you. A
pretty mare’s nest arresting him would have been.” He turned to
Inglethorp. “But, if you’ll excuse me, sir, why couldn’t you say all
this at the inquest?”

“I will tell you why,” interrupted Poirot. “There was a certain
rumour——”

“A most malicious and utterly untrue one,” interrupted Alfred
Inglethorp in an agitated voice.

“And Mr. Inglethorp was anxious to have no scandal revived just at
present. Am I right?”

“Quite right.” Inglethorp nodded. “With my poor Emily not yet buried,
can you wonder I was anxious that no more lying rumours should be
started.”

“Between you and me, sir,” remarked Japp, “I’d sooner have any amount
of rumours than be arrested for murder. And I venture to think your
poor lady would have felt the same. And, if it hadn’t been for Mr.
Poirot here, arrested you would have been, as sure as eggs is eggs!”

“I was foolish, no doubt,” murmured Inglethorp. “But you do not know,
inspector, how I have been persecuted and maligned.” And he shot a
baleful glance at Evelyn Howard.

“Now, sir,” said Japp, turning briskly to John, “I should like to see
the lady’s bedroom, please, and after that I’ll have a little chat with
the servants. Don’t you bother about anything. Mr. Poirot, here, will
show me the way.”

As they all went out of the room, Poirot turned and made me a sign to
follow him upstairs. There he caught me by the arm, and drew me aside.

“Quick, go to the other wing. Stand there—just this side of the baize
door. Do not move till I come.” Then, turning rapidly, he rejoined the
two detectives.

I followed his instructions, taking up my position by the baize door,
and wondering what on earth lay behind the request. Why was I to stand
in this particular spot on guard? I looked thoughtfully down the
corridor in front of me. An idea struck me. With the exception of
Cynthia Murdoch’s, everyone’s room was in this left wing. Had that
anything to do with it? Was I to report who came or went? I stood
faithfully at my post. The minutes passed. Nobody came. Nothing
happened.

It must have been quite twenty minutes before Poirot rejoined me.

“You have not stirred?”

“No, I’ve stuck here like a rock. Nothing’s happened.”

“Ah!” Was he pleased, or disappointed? “You’ve seen nothing at all?”

“No.”

“But you have probably heard something? A big bump—eh, _mon ami?_”

“No.”

“Is it possible? Ah, but I am vexed with myself! I am not usually
clumsy. I made but a slight gesture”—I know Poirot’s gestures—“with the
left hand, and over went the table by the bed!”

He looked so childishly vexed and crest-fallen that I hastened to
console him.

“Never mind, old chap. What does it matter? Your triumph downstairs
excited you. I can tell you, that was a surprise to us all. There must
be more in this affair of Inglethorp’s with Mrs. Raikes than we
thought, to make him hold his tongue so persistently. What are you
going to do now? Where are the Scotland Yard fellows?”

“Gone down to interview the servants. I showed them all our exhibits. I
am disappointed in Japp. He has no method!”

“Hullo!” I said, looking out of the window. “Here’s Dr. Bauerstein. I
believe you’re right about that man, Poirot. I don’t like him.”

“He is clever,” observed Poirot meditatively.

“Oh, clever as the devil! I must say I was overjoyed to see him in the
plight he was in on Tuesday. You never saw such a spectacle!” And I
described the doctor’s adventure. “He looked a regular scarecrow!
Plastered with mud from head to foot.”

“You saw him, then?”

“Yes. Of course, he didn’t want to come in—it was just after dinner—but
Mr. Inglethorp insisted.”

“What?” Poirot caught me violently by the shoulders. “Was Dr.
Bauerstein here on Tuesday evening? Here? And you never told me? Why
did you not tell me? Why? Why?”

He appeared to be in an absolute frenzy.

“My dear Poirot,” I expostulated, “I never thought it would interest
you. I didn’t know it was of any importance.”

“Importance? It is of the first importance! So Dr. Bauerstein was here
on Tuesday night—the night of the murder. Hastings, do you not see?
That alters everything—everything!”

I had never seen him so upset. Loosening his hold of me, he
mechanically straightened a pair of candlesticks, still murmuring to
himself: “Yes, that alters everything—everything.”

Suddenly he seemed to come to a decision.

“_Allons!_” he said. “We must act at once. Where is Mr. Cavendish?”

John was in the smoking-room. Poirot went straight to him.

“Mr. Cavendish, I have some important business in Tadminster. A new
clue. May I take your motor?”

“Why, of course. Do you mean at once?”

“If you please.”

John rang the bell, and ordered round the car. In another ten minutes,
we were racing down the park and along the high road to Tadminster.

“Now, Poirot,” I remarked resignedly, “perhaps you will tell me what
all this is about?”

“Well, _mon ami_, a good deal you can guess for yourself. Of course you
realize that, now Mr. Inglethorp is out of it, the whole position is
greatly changed. We are face to face with an entirely new problem. We
know now that there is one person who did not buy the poison. We have
cleared away the manufactured clues. Now for the real ones. I have
ascertained that anyone in the household, with the exception of Mrs.
Cavendish, who was playing tennis with you, could have personated Mr.
Inglethorp on Monday evening. In the same way, we have his statement
that he put the coffee down in the hall. No one took much notice of
that at the inquest—but now it has a very different significance. We
must find out who did take that coffee to Mrs. Inglethorp eventually,
or who passed through the hall whilst it was standing there. From your
account, there are only two people whom we can positively say did not
go near the coffee—Mrs. Cavendish, and Mademoiselle Cynthia.”

“Yes, that is so.” I felt an inexpressible lightening of the heart.
Mary Cavendish could certainly not rest under suspicion.

“In clearing Alfred Inglethorp,” continued Poirot, “I have been obliged
to show my hand sooner than I intended. As long as I might be thought
to be pursuing him, the criminal would be off his guard. Now, he will
be doubly careful. Yes—doubly careful.” He turned to me abruptly. “Tell
me, Hastings, you yourself—have you no suspicions of anybody?”

I hesitated. To tell the truth, an idea, wild and extravagant in
itself, had once or twice that morning flashed through my brain. I had
rejected it as absurd, nevertheless it persisted.

“You couldn’t call it a suspicion,” I murmured. “It’s so utterly
foolish.”

“Come now,” urged Poirot encouragingly. “Do not fear. Speak your mind.
You should always pay attention to your instincts.”

“Well then,” I blurted out, “it’s absurd—but I suspect Miss Howard of
not telling all she knows!”

“Miss Howard?”

“Yes—you’ll laugh at me——”

“Not at all. Why should I?”

“I can’t help feeling,” I continued blunderingly; “that we’ve rather
left her out of the possible suspects, simply on the strength of her
having been away from the place. But, after all, she was only fifteen
miles away. A car would do it in half an hour. Can we say positively
that she was away from Styles on the night of the murder?”

“Yes, my friend,” said Poirot unexpectedly, “we can. One of my first
actions was to ring up the hospital where she was working.”

“Well?”

“Well, I learnt that Miss Howard had been on afternoon duty on Tuesday,
and that—a convoy coming in unexpectedly—she had kindly offered to
remain on night duty, which offer was gratefully accepted. That
disposes of that.”

“Oh!” I said, rather nonplussed. “Really,” I continued, “it’s her
extraordinary vehemence against Inglethorp that started me off
suspecting her. I can’t help feeling she’d do anything against him. And
I had an idea she might know something about the destroying of the
will. She might have burnt the new one, mistaking it for the earlier
one in his favour. She is so terribly bitter against him.”

“You consider her vehemence unnatural?”

“Y—es. She is so very violent. I wondered really whether she is quite
sane on that point.”

Poirot shook his head energetically.

“No, no, you are on a wrong tack there. There is nothing weak-minded or
degenerate about Miss Howard. She is an excellent specimen of
well-balanced English beef and brawn. She is sanity itself.”

“Yet her hatred of Inglethorp seems almost a mania. My idea was—a very
ridiculous one, no doubt—that she had intended to poison him—and that,
in some way, Mrs. Inglethorp got hold of it by mistake. But I don’t at
all see how it could have been done. The whole thing is absurd and
ridiculous to the last degree.”

“Still you are right in one thing. It is always wise to suspect
everybody until you can prove logically, and to your own satisfaction,
that they are innocent. Now, what reasons are there against Miss
Howard’s having deliberately poisoned Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“Why, she was devoted to her!” I exclaimed.

“Tcha! Tcha!” cried Poirot irritably. “You argue like a child. If Miss
Howard were capable of poisoning the old lady, she would be quite
equally capable of simulating devotion. No, we must look elsewhere. You
are perfectly correct in your assumption that her vehemence against
Alfred Inglethorp is too violent to be natural; but you are quite wrong
in the deduction you draw from it. I have drawn my own deductions,
which I believe to be correct, but I will not speak of them at
present.” He paused a minute, then went on. “Now, to my way of
thinking, there is one insuperable objection to Miss Howard’s being the
murderess.”

“And that is?”

“That in no possible way could Mrs. Inglethorp’s death benefit Miss
Howard. Now there is no murder without a motive.”

I reflected.

“Could not Mrs. Inglethorp have made a will in her favour?”

Poirot shook his head.

“But you yourself suggested that possibility to Mr. Wells?”

Poirot smiled.

“That was for a reason. I did not want to mention the name of the
person who was actually in my mind. Miss Howard occupied very much the
same position, so I used her name instead.”

“Still, Mrs. Inglethorp might have done so. Why, that will, made on the
afternoon of her death may——”

But Poirot’s shake of the head was so energetic that I stopped.

“No, my friend. I have certain little ideas of my own about that will.
But I can tell you this much—it was not in Miss Howard’s favour.”

I accepted his assurance, though I did not really see how he could be
so positive about the matter.

“Well,” I said, with a sigh, “we will acquit Miss Howard, then. It is
partly your fault that I ever came to suspect her. It was what you said
about her evidence at the inquest that set me off.”

Poirot looked puzzled.

“What did I say about her evidence at the inquest?”

“Don’t you remember? When I cited her and John Cavendish as being above
suspicion?”

“Oh—ah—yes.” He seemed a little confused, but recovered himself. “By
the way, Hastings, there is something I want you to do for me.”

“Certainly. What is it?”

“Next time you happen to be alone with Lawrence Cavendish, I want you
to say this to him. ‘I have a message for you, from Poirot. He says:
“Find the extra coffee-cup, and you can rest in peace!”’ Nothing more.
Nothing less.”

“‘Find the extra coffee-cup, and you can rest in peace.’ Is that
right?” I asked, much mystified.

“Excellent.”

“But what does it mean?”

“Ah, that I will leave you to find out. You have access to the facts.
Just say that to him, and see what he says.”

“Very well—but it’s all extremely mysterious.”

We were running into Tadminster now, and Poirot directed the car to the
“Analytical Chemist.”

Poirot hopped down briskly, and went inside. In a few minutes he was
back again.

“There,” he said. “That is all my business.”

“What were you doing there?” I asked, in lively curiosity.

“I left something to be analysed.”

“Yes, but what?”

“The sample of cocoa I took from the saucepan in the bedroom.”

“But that has already been tested!” I cried, stupefied. “Dr. Bauerstein
had it tested, and you yourself laughed at the possibility of there
being strychnine in it.”

“I know Dr. Bauerstein had it tested,” replied Poirot quietly.

“Well, then?”

“Well, I have a fancy for having it analysed again, that is all.”

And not another word on the subject could I drag out of him.

This proceeding of Poirot’s, in respect of the cocoa, puzzled me
intensely. I could see neither rhyme nor reason in it. However, my
confidence in him, which at one time had rather waned, was fully
restored since his belief in Alfred Inglethorp’s innocence had been so
triumphantly vindicated.

The funeral of Mrs. Inglethorp took place the following day, and on
Monday, as I came down to a late breakfast, John drew me aside, and
informed me that Mr. Inglethorp was leaving that morning, to take up
his quarters at the Stylites Arms until he should have completed his
plans.

“And really it’s a great relief to think he’s going, Hastings,”
continued my honest friend. “It was bad enough before, when we thought
he’d done it, but I’m hanged if it isn’t worse now, when we all feel
guilty for having been so down on the fellow. The fact is, we’ve
treated him abominably. Of course, things did look black against him. I
don’t see how anyone could blame us for jumping to the conclusions we
did. Still, there it is, we were in the wrong, and now there’s a
beastly feeling that one ought to make amends; which is difficult, when
one doesn’t like the fellow a bit better than one did before. The whole
thing’s damned awkward! And I’m thankful he’s had the tact to take
himself off. It’s a good thing Styles wasn’t the mater’s to leave to
him. Couldn’t bear to think of the fellow lording it here. He’s welcome
to her money.”

“You’ll be able to keep up the place all right?” I asked.

“Oh, yes. There are the death duties, of course, but half my father’s
money goes with the place, and Lawrence will stay with us for the
present, so there is his share as well. We shall be pinched at first,
of course, because, as I once told you, I am in a bit of a hole
financially myself. Still, the Johnnies will wait now.”

In the general relief at Inglethorp’s approaching departure, we had the
most genial breakfast we had experienced since the tragedy. Cynthia,
whose young spirits were naturally buoyant, was looking quite her
pretty self again, and we all, with the exception of Lawrence, who
seemed unalterably gloomy and nervous, were quietly cheerful, at the
opening of a new and hopeful future.

The papers, of course, had been full of the tragedy. Glaring headlines,
sandwiched biographies of every member of the household, subtle
innuendoes, the usual familiar tag about the police having a clue.
Nothing was spared us. It was a slack time. The war was momentarily
inactive, and the newspapers seized with avidity on this crime in
fashionable life: “The Mysterious Affair at Styles” was the topic of
the moment.

Naturally it was very annoying for the Cavendishes. The house was
constantly besieged by reporters, who were consistently denied
admission, but who continued to haunt the village and the grounds,
where they lay in wait with cameras, for any unwary members of the
household. We all lived in a blast of publicity. The Scotland Yard men
came and went, examining, questioning, lynx-eyed and reserved of
tongue. Towards what end they were working, we did not know. Had they
any clue, or would the whole thing remain in the category of
undiscovered crimes?

After breakfast, Dorcas came up to me rather mysteriously, and asked if
she might have a few words with me.

“Certainly. What is it, Dorcas?”

“Well, it’s just this, sir. You’ll be seeing the Belgian gentleman
to-day perhaps?” I nodded. “Well, sir, you know how he asked me so
particular if the mistress, or anyone else, had a green dress?”

“Yes, yes. You have found one?” My interest was aroused.

“No, not that, sir. But since then I’ve remembered what the young
gentlemen”—John and Lawrence were still the “young gentlemen” to
Dorcas—“call the ‘dressing-up box.’ It’s up in the front attic, sir. A
great chest, full of old clothes and fancy dresses, and what not. And
it came to me sudden like that there might be a green dress amongst
them. So, if you’d tell the Belgian gentleman——”

“I will tell him, Dorcas,” I promised.

“Thank you very much, sir. A very nice gentleman he is, sir. And quite
a different class from them two detectives from London, what goes
prying about, and asking questions. I don’t hold with foreigners as a
rule, but from what the newspapers say I make out as how these brave
Belges isn’t the ordinary run of foreigners, and certainly he’s a most
polite spoken gentleman.”

Dear old Dorcas! As she stood there, with her honest face upturned to
mine, I thought what a fine specimen she was of the old-fashioned
servant that is so fast dying out.

I thought I might as well go down to the village at once, and look up
Poirot; but I met him half-way, coming up to the house, and at once
gave him Dorcas’s message.

“Ah, the brave Dorcas! We will look at the chest, although—but no
matter—we will examine it all the same.”

We entered the house by one of the windows. There was no one in the
hall, and we went straight up to the attic.

Sure enough, there was the chest, a fine old piece, all studded with
brass nails, and full to overflowing with every imaginable type of
garment.

Poirot bundled everything out on the floor with scant ceremony. There
were one or two green fabrics of varying shades; but Poirot shook his
head over them all. He seemed somewhat apathetic in the search, as
though he expected no great results from it. Suddenly he gave an
exclamation.

“What is it?”

“Look!”

The chest was nearly empty, and there, reposing right at the bottom,
was a magnificent black beard.

“_Ohó!_” said Poirot. “_Ohó!_” He turned it over in his hands,
examining it closely. “New,” he remarked. “Yes, quite new.”

After a moment’s hesitation, he replaced it in the chest, heaped all
the other things on top of it as before, and made his way briskly
downstairs. He went straight to the pantry, where we found Dorcas
busily polishing her silver.

Poirot wished her good morning with Gallic politeness, and went on:

“We have been looking through that chest, Dorcas. I am much obliged to
you for mentioning it. There is, indeed, a fine collection there. Are
they often used, may I ask?”

“Well, sir, not very often nowadays, though from time to time we do
have what the young gentlemen call ‘a dress-up night.’ And very funny
it is sometimes, sir. Mr. Lawrence, he’s wonderful. Most comic! I shall
never forget the night he came down as the Char of Persia, I think he
called it—a sort of Eastern King it was. He had the big paper knife in
his hand, and ‘Mind, Dorcas,’ he says, ‘you’ll have to be very
respectful. This is my specially sharpened scimitar, and it’s off with
your head if I’m at all displeased with you!’ Miss Cynthia, she was
what they call an Apache, or some such name—a Frenchified sort of
cut-throat, I take it to be. A real sight she looked. You’d never have
believed a pretty young lady like that could have made herself into
such a ruffian. Nobody would have known her.”

“These evenings must have been great fun,” said Poirot genially. “I
suppose Mr. Lawrence wore that fine black beard in the chest upstairs,
when he was Shah of Persia?”

“He did have a beard, sir,” replied Dorcas, smiling. “And well I know
it, for he borrowed two skeins of my black wool to make it with! And
I’m sure it looked wonderfully natural at a distance. I didn’t know as
there was a beard up there at all. It must have been got quite lately,
I think. There was a red wig, I know, but nothing else in the way of
hair. Burnt corks they use mostly—though ‘tis messy getting it off
again. Miss Cynthia was a nigger once, and, oh, the trouble she had.”

“So Dorcas knows nothing about that black beard,” said Poirot
thoughtfully, as we walked out into the hall again.

“Do you think it is _the_ one?” I whispered eagerly.

Poirot nodded.

“I do. You notice it had been trimmed?”

“No.”

“Yes. It was cut exactly the shape of Mr. Inglethorp’s, and I found one
or two snipped hairs. Hastings, this affair is very deep.”

“Who put it in the chest, I wonder?”

“Someone with a good deal of intelligence,” remarked Poirot dryly. “You
realize that he chose the one place in the house to hide it where its
presence would not be remarked? Yes, he is intelligent. But we must be
more intelligent. We must be so intelligent that he does not suspect us
of being intelligent at all.”

I acquiesced.

“There, _mon ami_, you will be of great assistance to me.”

I was pleased with the compliment. There had been times when I hardly
thought that Poirot appreciated me at my true worth.

“Yes,” he continued, staring at me thoughtfully, “you will be
invaluable.”

This was naturally gratifying, but Poirot’s next words were not so
welcome.

“I must have an ally in the house,” he observed reflectively.

“You have me,” I protested.

“True, but you are not sufficient.”

I was hurt, and showed it. Poirot hurried to explain himself.

“You do not quite take my meaning. You are known to be working with me.
I want somebody who is not associated with us in any way.”

“Oh, I see. How about John?”

“No, I think not.”

“The dear fellow isn’t perhaps very bright,” I said thoughtfully.

“Here comes Miss Howard,” said Poirot suddenly. “She is the very
person. But I am in her black books, since I cleared Mr. Inglethorp.
Still, we can but try.”

With a nod that was barely civil, Miss Howard assented to Poirot’s
request for a few minutes’ conversation.

We went into the little morning-room, and Poirot closed the door.

“Well, Monsieur Poirot,” said Miss Howard impatiently, “what is it? Out
with it. I’m busy.”

“Do you remember, mademoiselle, that I once asked you to help me?”

“Yes, I do.” The lady nodded. “And I told you I’d help you with
pleasure—to hang Alfred Inglethorp.”

“Ah!” Poirot studied her seriously. “Miss Howard, I will ask you one
question. I beg of you to reply to it truthfully.”

“Never tell lies,” replied Miss Howard.

“It is this. Do you still believe that Mrs. Inglethorp was poisoned by
her husband?”

“What do you mean?” she asked sharply. “You needn’t think your pretty
explanations influence me in the slightest. I’ll admit that it wasn’t
he who bought strychnine at the chemist’s shop. What of that? I dare
say he soaked fly paper, as I told you at the beginning.”

“That is arsenic—not strychnine,” said Poirot mildly.

“What does that matter? Arsenic would put poor Emily out of the way
just as well as strychnine. If I’m convinced he did it, it doesn’t
matter a jot to me _how_ he did it.”

“Exactly. _If_ you are convinced he did it,” said Poirot quietly. “I
will put my question in another form. Did you ever in your heart of
hearts believe that Mrs. Inglethorp was poisoned by her husband?”

“Good heavens!” cried Miss Howard. “Haven’t I always told you the man
is a villain? Haven’t I always told you he would murder her in her bed?
Haven’t I always hated him like poison?”

“Exactly,” said Poirot. “That bears out my little idea entirely.”

“What little idea?”

“Miss Howard, do you remember a conversation that took place on the day
of my friend’s arrival here? He repeated it to me, and there is a
sentence of yours that has impressed me very much. Do you remember
affirming that if a crime had been committed, and anyone you loved had
been murdered, you felt certain that you would know by instinct who the
criminal was, even if you were quite unable to prove it?”

“Yes, I remember saying that. I believe it too. I suppose you think it
nonsense?”

“Not at all.”

“And yet you will pay no attention to my instinct against Alfred
Inglethorp.”

“No,” said Poirot curtly. “Because your instinct is not against Mr.
Inglethorp.”

“What?”

“No. You wish to believe he committed the crime. You believe him
capable of committing it. But your instinct tells you he did not commit
it. It tells you more—shall I go on?”

She was staring at him, fascinated, and made a slight affirmative
movement of the hand.

“Shall I tell you why you have been so vehement against Mr. Inglethorp?
It is because you have been trying to believe what you wish to believe.
It is because you are trying to drown and stifle your instinct, which
tells you another name——”

“No, no, no!” cried Miss Howard wildly, flinging up her hands. “Don’t
say it! Oh, don’t say it! It isn’t true! It can’t be true. I don’t know
what put such a wild—such a dreadful—idea into my head!”

“I am right, am I not?” asked Poirot.

“Yes, yes; you must be a wizard to have guessed. But it can’t be
so—it’s too monstrous, too impossible. It _must_ be Alfred Inglethorp.”

Poirot shook his head gravely.

“Don’t ask me about it,” continued Miss Howard, “because I shan’t tell
you. I won’t admit it, even to myself. I must be mad to think of such a
thing.”

Poirot nodded, as if satisfied.

“I will ask you nothing. It is enough for me that it is as I thought.
And I—I, too, have an instinct. We are working together towards a
common end.”

“Don’t ask me to help you, because I won’t. I wouldn’t lift a finger
to—to——” She faltered.

“You will help me in spite of yourself. I ask you nothing—but you will
be my ally. You will not be able to help yourself. You will do the only
thing that I want of you.”

“And that is?”

“You will watch!”

Evelyn Howard bowed her head.

“Yes, I can’t help doing that. I am always watching—always hoping I
shall be proved wrong.”

“If we are wrong, well and good,” said Poirot. “No one will be more
pleased than I shall. But, if we are right? If we are right, Miss
Howard, on whose side are you then?”

“I don’t know, I don’t know——”

“Come now.”

“It could be hushed up.”

“There must be no hushing up.”

“But Emily herself——” She broke off.

“Miss Howard,” said Poirot gravely, “this is unworthy of you.”

Suddenly she took her face from her hands.

“Yes,” she said quietly, “that was not Evelyn Howard who spoke!” She
flung her head up proudly. “_This_ is Evelyn Howard! And she is on the
side of Justice! Let the cost be what it may.” And with these words,
she walked firmly out of the room.

“There,” said Poirot, looking after her, “goes a very valuable ally.
That woman, Hastings, has got brains as well as a heart.”

I did not reply.

“Instinct is a marvellous thing,” mused Poirot. “It can neither be
explained nor ignored.”

“You and Miss Howard seem to know what you are talking about,” I
observed coldly. “Perhaps you don’t realize that _I_ am still in the
dark.”

“Really? Is that so, _mon ami?_”

“Yes. Enlighten me, will you?”

Poirot studied me attentively for a moment or two. Then, to my intense
surprise, he shook his head decidedly.

“No, my friend.”

“Oh, look here, why not?”

“Two is enough for a secret.”

“Well, I think it is very unfair to keep back facts from me.”

“I am not keeping back facts. Every fact that I know is in your
possession. You can draw your own deductions from them. This time it is
a question of ideas.”

“Still, it would be interesting to know.”

Poirot looked at me very earnestly, and again shook his head.

“You see,” he said sadly, “_you_ have no instincts.”

“It was intelligence you were requiring just now,” I pointed out.

“The two often go together,” said Poirot enigmatically.

The remark seemed so utterly irrelevant that I did not even take the
trouble to answer it. But I decided that if I made any interesting and
important discoveries—as no doubt I should—I would keep them to myself,
and surprise Poirot with the ultimate result.

There are times when it is one’s duty to assert oneself.




CHAPTER IX.
DR. BAUERSTEIN


I had had no opportunity as yet of passing on Poirot’s message to
Lawrence. But now, as I strolled out on the lawn, still nursing a
grudge against my friend’s high-handedness, I saw Lawrence on the
croquet lawn, aimlessly knocking a couple of very ancient balls about,
with a still more ancient mallet.

It struck me that it would be a good opportunity to deliver my message.
Otherwise, Poirot himself might relieve me of it. It was true that I
did not quite gather its purport, but I flattered myself that by
Lawrence’s reply, and perhaps a little skillful cross-examination on my
part, I should soon perceive its significance. Accordingly I accosted
him.

“I’ve been looking for you,” I remarked untruthfully.

“Have you?”

“Yes. The truth is, I’ve got a message for you—from Poirot.”

“Yes?”

“He told me to wait until I was alone with you,” I said, dropping my
voice significantly, and watching him intently out of the corner of my
eye. I have always been rather good at what is called, I believe,
creating an atmosphere.

“Well?”

There was no change of expression in the dark melancholic face. Had he
any idea of what I was about to say?

“This is the message.” I dropped my voice still lower. “‘Find the extra
coffee-cup, and you can rest in peace.’”

“What on earth does he mean?” Lawrence stared at me in quite unaffected
astonishment.

“Don’t you know?”

“Not in the least. Do you?”

I was compelled to shake my head.

“What extra coffee-cup?”

“I don’t know.”

“He’d better ask Dorcas, or one of the maids, if he wants to know about
coffee-cups. It’s their business, not mine. I don’t know anything about
the coffee-cups, except that we’ve got some that are never used, which
are a perfect dream! Old Worcester. You’re not a connoisseur, are you,
Hastings?”

I shook my head.

“You miss a lot. A really perfect bit of old china—it’s pure delight to
handle it, or even to look at it.”

“Well, what am I to tell Poirot?”

“Tell him I don’t know what he’s talking about. It’s double Dutch to
me.”

“All right.”

I was moving off towards the house again when he suddenly called me
back.

“I say, what was the end of that message? Say it over again, will you?”

“‘Find the extra coffee-cup, and you can rest in peace.’ Are you sure
you don’t know what it means?” I asked him earnestly.

He shook his head.

“No,” he said musingly, “I don’t. I—I wish I did.”

The boom of the gong sounded from the house, and we went in together.
Poirot had been asked by John to remain to lunch, and was already
seated at the table.

By tacit consent, all mention of the tragedy was barred. We conversed
on the war, and other outside topics. But after the cheese and biscuits
had been handed round, and Dorcas had left the room, Poirot suddenly
leant forward to Mrs. Cavendish.

“Pardon me, madame, for recalling unpleasant memories, but I have a
little idea”—Poirot’s “little ideas” were becoming a perfect
byword—“and would like to ask one or two questions.”

“Of me? Certainly.”

“You are too amiable, madame. What I want to ask is this: the door
leading into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room from that of Mademoiselle Cynthia,
it was bolted, you say?”

“Certainly it was bolted,” replied Mary Cavendish, rather surprised. “I
said so at the inquest.”

“Bolted?”

“Yes.” She looked perplexed.

“I mean,” explained Poirot, “you are sure it was bolted, and not merely
locked?”

“Oh, I see what you mean. No, I don’t know. I said bolted, meaning that
it was fastened, and I could not open it, but I believe all the doors
were found bolted on the inside.”

“Still, as far as you are concerned, the door might equally well have
been locked?”

“Oh, yes.”

“You yourself did not happen to notice, madame, when you entered Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room, whether that door was bolted or not?”

“I—I believe it was.”

“But you did not see it?”

“No. I—never looked.”

“But _I_ did,” interrupted Lawrence suddenly. “I happened to notice
that it _was_ bolted.”

“Ah, that settles it.” And Poirot looked crestfallen.

I could not help rejoicing that, for once, one of his “little ideas”
had come to naught.

After lunch Poirot begged me to accompany him home. I consented rather
stiffly.

“You are annoyed, is it not so?” he asked anxiously, as we walked
through the park.

“Not at all,” I said coldly.

“That is well. That lifts a great load from my mind.”

This was not quite what I had intended. I had hoped that he would have
observed the stiffness of my manner. Still, the fervour of his words
went towards the appeasing of my just displeasure. I thawed.

“I gave Lawrence your message,” I said.

“And what did he say? He was entirely puzzled?”

“Yes. I am quite sure he had no idea of what you meant.”

I had expected Poirot to be disappointed; but, to my surprise, he
replied that that was as he had thought, and that he was very glad. My
pride forbade me to ask any questions.

Poirot switched off on another tack.

“Mademoiselle Cynthia was not at lunch to-day? How was that?”

“She is at the hospital again. She resumed work to-day.”

“Ah, she is an industrious little demoiselle. And pretty too. She is
like pictures I have seen in Italy. I would rather like to see that
dispensary of hers. Do you think she would show it to me?”

“I am sure she would be delighted. It’s an interesting little place.”

“Does she go there every day?”

“She has all Wednesdays off, and comes back to lunch on Saturdays.
Those are her only times off.”

“I will remember. Women are doing great work nowadays, and Mademoiselle
Cynthia is clever—oh, yes, she has brains, that little one.”

“Yes. I believe she has passed quite a stiff exam.”

“Without doubt. After all, it is very responsible work. I suppose they
have very strong poisons there?”

“Yes, she showed them to us. They are kept locked up in a little
cupboard. I believe they have to be very careful. They always take out
the key before leaving the room.”

“Indeed. It is near the window, this cupboard?”

“No, right the other side of the room. Why?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“I wondered. That is all. Will you come in?”

We had reached the cottage.

“No. I think I’ll be getting back. I shall go round the long way
through the woods.”

The woods round Styles were very beautiful. After the walk across the
open park, it was pleasant to saunter lazily through the cool glades.
There was hardly a breath of wind, the very chirp of the birds was
faint and subdued. I strolled on a little way, and finally flung myself
down at the foot of a grand old beech-tree. My thoughts of mankind were
kindly and charitable. I even forgave Poirot for his absurd secrecy. In
fact, I was at peace with the world. Then I yawned.

I thought about the crime, and it struck me as being very unreal and
far off.

I yawned again.

Probably, I thought, it really never happened. Of course, it was all a
bad dream. The truth of the matter was that it was Lawrence who had
murdered Alfred Inglethorp with a croquet mallet. But it was absurd of
John to make such a fuss about it, and to go shouting out: “I tell you
I won’t have it!”

I woke up with a start.

At once I realized that I was in a very awkward predicament. For, about
twelve feet away from me, John and Mary Cavendish were standing facing
each other, and they were evidently quarrelling. And, quite as
evidently, they were unaware of my vicinity, for before I could move or
speak John repeated the words which had aroused me from my dream.

“I tell you, Mary, I won’t have it.”

Mary’s voice came, cool and liquid:

“Have _you_ any right to criticize my actions?”

“It will be the talk of the village! My mother was only buried on
Saturday, and here you are gadding about with the fellow.”

“Oh,” she shrugged her shoulders, “if it is only village gossip that
you mind!”

“But it isn’t. I’ve had enough of the fellow hanging about. He’s a
Polish Jew, anyway.”

“A tinge of Jewish blood is not a bad thing. It leavens the”—she looked
at him—“stolid stupidity of the ordinary Englishman.”

Fire in her eyes, ice in her voice. I did not wonder that the blood
rose to John’s face in a crimson tide.

“Mary!”

“Well?” Her tone did not change.

The pleading died out of his voice.

“Am I to understand that you will continue to see Bauerstein against my
express wishes?”

“If I choose.”

“You defy me?”

“No, but I deny your right to criticize my actions. Have _you_ no
friends of whom I should disapprove?”

John fell back a pace. The colour ebbed slowly from his face.

“What do you mean?” he said, in an unsteady voice.

“You see!” said Mary quietly. “You _do_ see, don’t you, that _you_ have
no right to dictate to _me_ as to the choice of my friends?”

John glanced at her pleadingly, a stricken look on his face.

“No right? Have I _no_ right, Mary?” he said unsteadily. He stretched
out his hands. “Mary——”

For a moment, I thought she wavered. A softer expression came over her
face, then suddenly she turned almost fiercely away.

“None!”

She was walking away when John sprang after her, and caught her by the
arm.

“Mary”—his voice was very quiet now—“are you in love with this fellow
Bauerstein?”

She hesitated, and suddenly there swept across her face a strange
expression, old as the hills, yet with something eternally young about
it. So might some Egyptian sphinx have smiled.

She freed herself quietly from his arm, and spoke over her shoulder.

“Perhaps,” she said; and then swiftly passed out of the little glade,
leaving John standing there as though he had been turned to stone.

Rather ostentatiously, I stepped forward, crackling some dead branches
with my feet as I did so. John turned. Luckily, he took it for granted
that I had only just come upon the scene.

“Hullo, Hastings. Have you seen the little fellow safely back to his
cottage? Quaint little chap! Is he any good, though, really?”

“He was considered one of the finest detectives of his day.”

“Oh, well, I suppose there must be something in it, then. What a rotten
world it is, though!”

“You find it so?” I asked.

“Good Lord, yes! There’s this terrible business to start with. Scotland
Yard men in and out of the house like a jack-in-the-box! Never know
where they won’t turn up next. Screaming headlines in every paper in
the country—damn all journalists, I say! Do you know there was a whole
crowd staring in at the lodge gates this morning. Sort of Madame
Tussaud’s chamber of horrors business that can be seen for nothing.
Pretty thick, isn’t it?”

“Cheer up, John!” I said soothingly. “It can’t last for ever.”

“Can’t it, though? It can last long enough for us never to be able to
hold up our heads again.”

“No, no, you’re getting morbid on the subject.”

“Enough to make a man morbid, to be stalked by beastly journalists and
stared at by gaping moon-faced idiots, wherever he goes! But there’s
worse than that.”

“What?”

John lowered his voice:

“Have you ever thought, Hastings—it’s a nightmare to me—who did it? I
can’t help feeling sometimes it must have been an accident.
Because—because—who could have done it? Now Inglethorp’s out of the
way, there’s no one else; no one, I mean, except—one of us.”

Yes, indeed, that was nightmare enough for any man! One of us? Yes,
surely it must be so, unless——-

A new idea suggested itself to my mind. Rapidly, I considered it. The
light increased. Poirot’s mysterious doings, his hints—they all fitted
in. Fool that I was not to have thought of this possibility before, and
what a relief for us all.

“No, John,” I said, “it isn’t one of us. How could it be?”

“I know, but, still, who else is there?”

“Can’t you guess?”

“No.”

I looked cautiously round, and lowered my voice.

“Dr. Bauerstein!” I whispered.

“Impossible!”

“Not at all.”

“But what earthly interest could he have in my mother’s death?”

“That I don’t see,” I confessed, “but I’ll tell you this: Poirot thinks
so.”

“Poirot? Does he? How do you know?”

I told him of Poirot’s intense excitement on hearing that Dr.
Bauerstein had been at Styles on the fatal night, and added:

“He said twice: ‘That alters everything.’ And I’ve been thinking. You
know Inglethorp said he had put down the coffee in the hall? Well, it
was just then that Bauerstein arrived. Isn’t it possible that, as
Inglethorp brought him through the hall, the doctor dropped something
into the coffee in passing?”

“H’m,” said John. “It would have been very risky.”

“Yes, but it was possible.”

“And then, how could he know it was her coffee? No, old fellow, I don’t
think that will wash.”

But I had remembered something else.

“You’re quite right. That wasn’t how it was done. Listen.” And I then
told him of the cocoa sample which Poirot had taken to be analysed.

John interrupted just as I had done.

“But, look here, Bauerstein had had it analysed already?”

“Yes, yes, that’s the point. I didn’t see it either until now. Don’t
you understand? Bauerstein had it analysed—that’s just it! If
Bauerstein’s the murderer, nothing could be simpler than for him to
substitute some ordinary cocoa for his sample, and send that to be
tested. And of course they would find no strychnine! But no one would
dream of suspecting Bauerstein, or think of taking another
sample—except Poirot,” I added, with belated recognition.

“Yes, but what about the bitter taste that cocoa won’t disguise?”

“Well, we’ve only his word for that. And there are other possibilities.
He’s admittedly one of the world’s greatest toxicologists——”

“One of the world’s greatest what? Say it again.”

“He knows more about poisons than almost anybody,” I explained. “Well,
my idea is, that perhaps he’s found some way of making strychnine
tasteless. Or it may not have been strychnine at all, but some obscure
drug no one has ever heard of, which produces much the same symptoms.”

“H’m, yes, that might be,” said John. “But look here, how could he have
got at the cocoa? That wasn’t downstairs?”

“No, it wasn’t,” I admitted reluctantly.

And then, suddenly, a dreadful possibility flashed through my mind. I
hoped and prayed it would not occur to John also. I glanced sideways at
him. He was frowning perplexedly, and I drew a deep breath of relief,
for the terrible thought that had flashed across my mind was this: that
Dr. Bauerstein might have had an accomplice.

Yet surely it could not be! Surely no woman as beautiful as Mary
Cavendish could be a murderess. Yet beautiful women had been known to
poison.

And suddenly I remembered that first conversation at tea on the day of
my arrival, and the gleam in her eyes as she had said that poison was a
woman’s weapon. How agitated she had been on that fatal Tuesday
evening! Had Mrs. Inglethorp discovered something between her and
Bauerstein, and threatened to tell her husband? Was it to stop that
denunciation that the crime had been committed?

Then I remembered that enigmatical conversation between Poirot and
Evelyn Howard. Was this what they had meant? Was this the monstrous
possibility that Evelyn had tried not to believe?

Yes, it all fitted in.

No wonder Miss Howard had suggested “hushing it up.” Now I understood
that unfinished sentence of hers: “Emily herself——” And in my heart I
agreed with her. Would not Mrs. Inglethorp have preferred to go
unavenged rather than have such terrible dishonour fall upon the name
of Cavendish.

“There’s another thing,” said John suddenly, and the unexpected sound
of his voice made me start guiltily. “Something which makes me doubt if
what you say can be true.”

“What’s that?” I asked, thankful that he had gone away from the subject
of how the poison could have been introduced into the cocoa.

“Why, the fact that Bauerstein demanded a post-mortem. He needn’t have
done so. Little Wilkins would have been quite content to let it go at
heart disease.”

“Yes,” I said doubtfully. “But we don’t know. Perhaps he thought it
safer in the long run. Someone might have talked afterwards. Then the
Home Office might have ordered exhumation. The whole thing would have
come out, then, and he would have been in an awkward position, for no
one would have believed that a man of his reputation could have been
deceived into calling it heart disease.”

“Yes, that’s possible,” admitted John. “Still,” he added, “I’m blest if
I can see what his motive could have been.”

I trembled.

“Look here,” I said, “I may be altogether wrong. And, remember, all
this is in confidence.”

“Oh, of course—that goes without saying.”

We had walked, as we talked, and now we passed through the little gate
into the garden. Voices rose near at hand, for tea was spread out under
the sycamore-tree, as it had been on the day of my arrival.

Cynthia was back from the hospital, and I placed my chair beside her,
and told her of Poirot’s wish to visit the dispensary.

“Of course! I’d love him to see it. He’d better come to tea there one
day. I must fix it up with him. He’s such a dear little man! But he
_is_ funny. He made me take the brooch out of my tie the other day, and
put it in again, because he said it wasn’t straight.”

I laughed.

“It’s quite a mania with him.”

“Yes, isn’t it?”

We were silent for a minute or two, and then, glancing in the direction
of Mary Cavendish, and dropping her voice, Cynthia said:

“Mr. Hastings.”

“Yes?”

“After tea, I want to talk to you.”

Her glance at Mary had set me thinking. I fancied that between these
two there existed very little sympathy. For the first time, it occurred
to me to wonder about the girl’s future. Mrs. Inglethorp had made no
provisions of any kind for her, but I imagined that John and Mary would
probably insist on her making her home with them—at any rate until the
end of the war. John, I knew, was very fond of her, and would be sorry
to let her go.

John, who had gone into the house, now reappeared. His good-natured
face wore an unaccustomed frown of anger.

“Confound those detectives! I can’t think what they’re after! They’ve
been in every room in the house—turning things inside out, and upside
down. It really is too bad! I suppose they took advantage of our all
being out. I shall go for that fellow Japp, when I next see him!”

“Lot of Paul Prys,” grunted Miss Howard.

Lawrence opined that they had to make a show of doing something.

Mary Cavendish said nothing.

After tea, I invited Cynthia to come for a walk, and we sauntered off
into the woods together.

“Well?” I inquired, as soon as we were protected from prying eyes by
the leafy screen.

With a sigh, Cynthia flung herself down, and tossed off her hat. The
sunlight, piercing through the branches, turned the auburn of her hair
to quivering gold.

“Mr. Hastings—you are always so kind, and you know such a lot.”

It struck me at this moment that Cynthia was really a very charming
girl! Much more charming than Mary, who never said things of that kind.

“Well?” I asked benignantly, as she hesitated.

“I want to ask your advice. What shall I do?”

“Do?”

“Yes. You see, Aunt Emily always told me I should be provided for. I
suppose she forgot, or didn’t think she was likely to die—anyway, I am
_not_ provided for! And I don’t know what to do. Do you think I ought
to go away from here at once?”

“Good heavens, no! They don’t want to part with you, I’m sure.”

Cynthia hesitated a moment, plucking up the grass with her tiny hands.
Then she said: “Mrs. Cavendish does. She hates me.”

“Hates you?” I cried, astonished.

Cynthia nodded.

“Yes. I don’t know why, but she can’t bear me; and _he_ can’t, either.”

“There I know you’re wrong,” I said warmly. “On the contrary, John is
very fond of you.”

“Oh, yes—_John_. I meant Lawrence. Not, of course, that I care whether
Lawrence hates me or not. Still, it’s rather horrid when no one loves
you, isn’t it?”

“But they do, Cynthia dear,” I said earnestly. “I’m sure you are
mistaken. Look, there is John—and Miss Howard——”

Cynthia nodded rather gloomily. “Yes, John likes me, I think, and of
course Evie, for all her gruff ways, wouldn’t be unkind to a fly. But
Lawrence never speaks to me if he can help it, and Mary can hardly
bring herself to be civil to me. She wants Evie to stay on, is begging
her to, but she doesn’t want me, and—and—I don’t know what to do.”
Suddenly the poor child burst out crying.

I don’t know what possessed me. Her beauty, perhaps, as she sat there,
with the sunlight glinting down on her head; perhaps the sense of
relief at encountering someone who so obviously could have no
connection with the tragedy; perhaps honest pity for her youth and
loneliness. Anyway, I leant forward, and taking her little hand, I said
awkwardly:

“Marry me, Cynthia.”

Unwittingly, I had hit upon a sovereign remedy for her tears. She sat
up at once, drew her hand away, and said, with some asperity:

“Don’t be silly!”

I was a little annoyed.

“I’m not being silly. I am asking you to do me the honour of becoming
my wife.”

To my intense surprise, Cynthia burst out laughing, and called me a
“funny dear.”

“It’s perfectly sweet of you,” she said, “but you know you don’t want
to!”

“Yes, I do. I’ve got——”

“Never mind what you’ve got. You don’t really want to—and I don’t
either.”

“Well, of course, that settles it,” I said stiffly. “But I don’t see
anything to laugh at. There’s nothing funny about a proposal.”

“No, indeed,” said Cynthia. “Somebody might accept you next time.
Good-bye, you’ve cheered me up _very_ much.”

And, with a final uncontrollable burst of merriment, she vanished
through the trees.

Thinking over the interview, it struck me as being profoundly
unsatisfactory.

It occurred to me suddenly that I would go down to the village, and
look up Bauerstein. Somebody ought to be keeping an eye on the fellow.
At the same time, it would be wise to allay any suspicions he might
have as to his being suspected. I remembered how Poirot had relied on
my diplomacy. Accordingly, I went to the little house with the
“Apartments” card inserted in the window, where I knew he lodged, and
tapped on the door.

An old woman came and opened it.

“Good afternoon,” I said pleasantly. “Is Dr. Bauerstein in?”

She stared at me.

“Haven’t you heard?”

“Heard what?”

“About him.”

“What about him?”

“He’s took.”

“Took? Dead?”

“No, took by the perlice.”

“By the police!” I gasped. “Do you mean they’ve arrested him?”

“Yes, that’s it, and——”

I waited to hear no more, but tore up the village to find Poirot.




CHAPTER X.
THE ARREST


To my extreme annoyance, Poirot was not in, and the old Belgian who
answered my knock informed me that he believed he had gone to London.

I was dumbfounded. What on earth could Poirot be doing in London! Was
it a sudden decision on his part, or had he already made up his mind
when he parted from me a few hours earlier?

I retraced my steps to Styles in some annoyance. With Poirot away, I
was uncertain how to act. Had he foreseen this arrest? Had he not, in
all probability, been the cause of it? Those questions I could not
resolve. But in the meantime what was I to do? Should I announce the
arrest openly at Styles, or not? Though I did not acknowledge it to
myself, the thought of Mary Cavendish was weighing on me. Would it not
be a terrible shock to her? For the moment, I set aside utterly any
suspicions of her. She could not be implicated—otherwise I should have
heard some hint of it.

Of course, there was no possibility of being able permanently to
conceal Dr. Bauerstein’s arrest from her. It would be announced in
every newspaper on the morrow. Still, I shrank from blurting it out. If
only Poirot had been accessible, I could have asked his advice. What
possessed him to go posting off to London in this unaccountable way?

In spite of myself, my opinion of his sagacity was immeasurably
heightened. I would never have dreamt of suspecting the doctor, had not
Poirot put it into my head. Yes, decidedly, the little man was clever.

After some reflecting, I decided to take John into my confidence, and
leave him to make the matter public or not, as he thought fit.

He gave vent to a prodigious whistle, as I imparted the news.

“Great Scott! You _were_ right, then. I couldn’t believe it at the
time.”

“No, it is astonishing until you get used to the idea, and see how it
makes everything fit in. Now, what are we to do? Of course, it will be
generally known to-morrow.”

John reflected.

“Never mind,” he said at last, “we won’t say anything at present. There
is no need. As you say, it will be known soon enough.”

But to my intense surprise, on getting down early the next morning, and
eagerly opening the newspapers, there was not a word about the arrest!
There was a column of mere padding about “The Styles Poisoning Case,”
but nothing further. It was rather inexplicable, but I supposed that,
for some reason or other, Japp wished to keep it out of the papers. It
worried me just a little, for it suggested the possibility that there
might be further arrests to come.

After breakfast, I decided to go down to the village, and see if Poirot
had returned yet; but, before I could start, a well-known face blocked
one of the windows, and the well-known voice said:

“_Bonjour, mon ami!_”

“Poirot,” I exclaimed, with relief, and seizing him by both hands, I
dragged him into the room. “I was never so glad to see anyone. Listen,
I have said nothing to anybody but John. Is that right?”

“My friend,” replied Poirot, “I do not know what you are talking
about.”

“Dr. Bauerstein’s arrest, of course,” I answered impatiently.

“Is Bauerstein arrested, then?”

“Did you not know it?”

“Not the least in the world.” But, pausing a moment, he added: “Still,
it does not surprise me. After all, we are only four miles from the
coast.”

“The coast?” I asked, puzzled. “What has that got to do with it?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Surely, it is obvious!”

“Not to me. No doubt I am very dense, but I cannot see what the
proximity of the coast has got to do with the murder of Mrs.
Inglethorp.”

“Nothing at all, of course,” replied Poirot, smiling. “But we were
speaking of the arrest of Dr. Bauerstein.”

“Well, he is arrested for the murder of Mrs. Inglethorp——”

“What?” cried Poirot, in apparently lively astonishment. “Dr.
Bauerstein arrested for the murder of Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“Yes.”

“Impossible! That would be too good a farce! Who told you that, my
friend?”

“Well, no one exactly told me,” I confessed. “But he is arrested.”

“Oh, yes, very likely. But for espionage, _mon ami_.”

“Espionage?” I gasped.

“Precisely.”

“Not for poisoning Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“Not unless our friend Japp has taken leave of his senses,” replied
Poirot placidly.

“But—but I thought you thought so too?”

Poirot gave me one look, which conveyed a wondering pity, and his full
sense of the utter absurdity of such an idea.

“Do you mean to say,” I asked, slowly adapting myself to the new idea,
“that Dr. Bauerstein is a spy?”

Poirot nodded.

“Have you never suspected it?”

“It never entered my head.”

“It did not strike you as peculiar that a famous London doctor should
bury himself in a little village like this, and should be in the habit
of walking about at all hours of the night, fully dressed?”

“No,” I confessed, “I never thought of such a thing.”

“He is, of course, a German by birth,” said Poirot thoughtfully,
“though he has practised so long in this country that nobody thinks of
him as anything but an Englishman. He was naturalized about fifteen
years ago. A very clever man—a Jew, of course.”

“The blackguard!” I cried indignantly.

“Not at all. He is, on the contrary, a patriot. Think what he stands to
lose. I admire the man myself.”

But I could not look at it in Poirot’s philosophical way.

“And this is the man with whom Mrs. Cavendish has been wandering about
all over the country!” I cried indignantly.

“Yes. I should fancy he had found her very useful,” remarked Poirot.
“So long as gossip busied itself in coupling their names together, any
other vagaries of the doctor’s passed unobserved.”

“Then you think he never really cared for her?” I asked eagerly—rather
too eagerly, perhaps, under the circumstances.

“That, of course, I cannot say, but—shall I tell you my own private
opinion, Hastings?”

“Yes.”

“Well, it is this: that Mrs. Cavendish does not care, and never has
cared one little jot about Dr. Bauerstein!”

“Do you really think so?” I could not disguise my pleasure.

“I am quite sure of it. And I will tell you why.”

“Yes?”

“Because she cares for someone else, _mon ami_.”

“Oh!” What did he mean? In spite of myself, an agreeable warmth spread
over me. I am not a vain man where women are concerned, but I
remembered certain evidences, too lightly thought of at the time,
perhaps, but which certainly seemed to indicate——

My pleasing thoughts were interrupted by the sudden entrance of Miss
Howard. She glanced round hastily to make sure there was no one else in
the room, and quickly produced an old sheet of brown paper. This she
handed to Poirot, murmuring as she did so the cryptic words:

“On top of the wardrobe.” Then she hurriedly left the room.

Poirot unfolded the sheet of paper eagerly, and uttered an exclamation
of satisfaction. He spread it out on the table.

“Come here, Hastings. Now tell me, what is that initial—J. or L.?”

It was a medium sized sheet of paper, rather dusty, as though it had
lain by for some time. But it was the label that was attracting
Poirot’s attention. At the top, it bore the printed stamp of Messrs.
Parkson’s, the well-known theatrical costumiers, and it was addressed
to “—(the debatable initial) Cavendish, Esq., Styles Court, Styles St.
Mary, Essex.”

“It might be T., or it might be L.,” I said, after studying the thing
for a minute or two. “It certainly isn’t a J.”

“Good,” replied Poirot, folding up the paper again. “I, also, am of
your way of thinking. It is an L., depend upon it!”

“Where did it come from?” I asked curiously. “Is it important?”

“Moderately so. It confirms a surmise of mine. Having deduced its
existence, I set Miss Howard to search for it, and, as you see, she has
been successful.”

“What did she mean by ‘On the top of the wardrobe’?”

“She meant,” replied Poirot promptly, “that she found it on top of a
wardrobe.”

“A funny place for a piece of brown paper,” I mused.

“Not at all. The top of a wardrobe is an excellent place for brown
paper and cardboard boxes. I have kept them there myself. Neatly
arranged, there is nothing to offend the eye.”

“Poirot,” I asked earnestly, “have you made up your mind about this
crime?”

“Yes—that is to say, I believe I know how it was committed.”

“Ah!”

“Unfortunately, I have no proof beyond my surmise, unless——” With
sudden energy, he caught me by the arm, and whirled me down the hall,
calling out in French in his excitement: “Mademoiselle Dorcas,
Mademoiselle Dorcas, _un moment, s’il vous plaît!_”

Dorcas, quite flurried by the noise, came hurrying out of the pantry.

“My good Dorcas, I have an idea—a little idea—if it should prove
justified, what magnificent chance! Tell me, on Monday, not Tuesday,
Dorcas, but Monday, the day before the tragedy, did anything go wrong
with Mrs. Inglethorp’s bell?”

Dorcas looked very surprised.

“Yes, sir, now you mention it, it did; though I don’t know how you came
to hear of it. A mouse, or some such, must have nibbled the wire
through. The man came and put it right on Tuesday morning.”

With a long drawn exclamation of ecstasy, Poirot led the way back to
the morning-room.

“See you, one should not ask for outside proof—no, reason should be
enough. But the flesh is weak, it is consolation to find that one is on
the right track. Ah, my friend, I am like a giant refreshed. I run! I
leap!”

And, in very truth, run and leap he did, gambolling wildly down the
stretch of lawn outside the long window.

“What is your remarkable little friend doing?” asked a voice behind me,
and I turned to find Mary Cavendish at my elbow. She smiled, and so did
I. “What is it all about?”

“Really, I can’t tell you. He asked Dorcas some question about a bell,
and appeared so delighted with her answer that he is capering about as
you see!”

Mary laughed.

“How ridiculous! He’s going out of the gate. Isn’t he coming back
to-day?”

“I don’t know. I’ve given up trying to guess what he’ll do next.”

“Is he quite mad, Mr. Hastings?”

“I honestly don’t know. Sometimes, I feel sure he is as mad as a
hatter; and then, just as he is at his maddest, I find there is method
in his madness.”

“I see.”

In spite of her laugh, Mary was looking thoughtful this morning. She
seemed grave, almost sad.

It occurred to me that it would be a good opportunity to tackle her on
the subject of Cynthia. I began rather tactfully, _I_ thought, but I
had not gone far before she stopped me authoritatively.

“You are an excellent advocate, I have no doubt, Mr. Hastings, but in
this case your talents are quite thrown away. Cynthia will run no risk
of encountering any unkindness from me.”

I began to stammer feebly that I hoped she hadn’t thought—— But again
she stopped me, and her words were so unexpected that they quite drove
Cynthia, and her troubles, out of my mind.

“Mr. Hastings,” she said, “do you think I and my husband are happy
together?”

I was considerably taken aback, and murmured something about it’s not
being my business to think anything of the sort.

“Well,” she said quietly, “whether it is your business or not, I will
tell you that we are _not_ happy.”

I said nothing, for I saw that she had not finished.

She began slowly, walking up and down the room, her head a little bent,
and that slim, supple figure of hers swaying gently as she walked. She
stopped suddenly, and looked up at me.

“You don’t know anything about me, do you?” she asked. “Where I come
from, who I was before I married John—anything, in fact? Well, I will
tell you. I will make a father confessor of you. You are kind, I
think—yes, I am sure you are kind.”

Somehow, I was not quite as elated as I might have been. I remembered
that Cynthia had begun her confidences in much the same way. Besides, a
father confessor should be elderly, it is not at all the role for a
young man.

“My father was English,” said Mrs. Cavendish, “but my mother was a
Russian.”

“Ah,” I said, “now I understand——”

“Understand what?”

“A hint of something foreign—different—that there has always been about
you.”

“My mother was very beautiful, I believe. I don’t know, because I never
saw her. She died when I was quite a little child. I believe there was
some tragedy connected with her death—she took an overdose of some
sleeping draught by mistake. However that may be, my father was
broken-hearted. Shortly afterwards, he went into the Consular Service.
Everywhere he went, I went with him. When I was twenty-three, I had
been nearly all over the world. It was a splendid life—I loved it.”

There was a smile on her face, and her head was thrown back. She seemed
living in the memory of those old glad days.

“Then my father died. He left me very badly off. I had to go and live
with some old aunts in Yorkshire.” She shuddered. “You will understand
me when I say that it was a deadly life for a girl brought up as I had
been. The narrowness, the deadly monotony of it, almost drove me mad.”
She paused a minute, and added in a different tone: “And then I met
John Cavendish.”

“Yes?”

“You can imagine that, from my aunts’ point of view, it was a very good
match for me. But I can honestly say it was not this fact which weighed
with me. No, he was simply a way of escape from the insufferable
monotony of my life.”

I said nothing, and after a moment, she went on:

“Don’t misunderstand me. I was quite honest with him. I told him, what
was true, that I liked him very much, that I hoped to come to like him
more, but that I was not in any way what the world calls ‘in love’ with
him. He declared that that satisfied him, and so—we were married.”

She waited a long time, a little frown had gathered on her forehead.
She seemed to be looking back earnestly into those past days.

“I think—I am sure—he cared for me at first. But I suppose we were not
well matched. Almost at once, we drifted apart. He—it is not a pleasing
thing for my pride, but it is the truth—tired of me very soon.” I must
have made some murmur of dissent, for she went on quickly: “Oh, yes, he
did! Not that it matters now—now that we’ve come to the parting of the
ways.”

“What do you mean?”

She answered quietly:

“I mean that I am not going to remain at Styles.”

“You and John are not going to live here?”

“John may live here, but I shall not.”

“You are going to leave him?”

“Yes.”

“But why?”

She paused a long time, and said at last:

“Perhaps—because I want to be—free!”

And, as she spoke, I had a sudden vision of broad spaces, virgin tracts
of forests, untrodden lands—and a realization of what freedom would
mean to such a nature as Mary Cavendish. I seemed to see her for a
moment as she was, a proud wild creature, as untamed by civilization as
some shy bird of the hills. A little cry broke from her lips:

“You don’t know, you don’t know, how this hateful place has been prison
to me!”

“I understand,” I said, “but—but don’t do anything rash.”

“Oh, rash!” Her voice mocked at my prudence.

Then suddenly I said a thing I could have bitten out my tongue for:

“You know that Dr. Bauerstein has been arrested?”

An instant coldness passed like a mask over her face, blotting out all
expression.

“John was so kind as to break that to me this morning.”

“Well, what do you think?” I asked feebly.

“Of what?”

“Of the arrest?”

“What should I think? Apparently he is a German spy; so the gardener
had told John.”

Her face and voice were absolutely cold and expressionless. Did she
care, or did she not?

She moved away a step or two, and fingered one of the flower vases.

“These are quite dead. I must do them again. Would you mind
moving—thank you, Mr. Hastings.” And she walked quietly past me out of
the window, with a cool little nod of dismissal.

No, surely she could not care for Bauerstein. No woman could act her
part with that icy unconcern.

Poirot did not make his appearance the following morning, and there was
no sign of the Scotland Yard men.

But, at lunch-time, there arrived a new piece of evidence—or rather
lack of evidence. We had vainly tried to trace the fourth letter, which
Mrs. Inglethorp had written on the evening preceding her death. Our
efforts having been in vain, we had abandoned the matter, hoping that
it might turn up of itself one day. And this is just what did happen,
in the shape of a communication, which arrived by the second post from
a firm of French music publishers, acknowledging Mrs. Inglethorp’s
cheque, and regretting they had been unable to trace a certain series
of Russian folksongs. So the last hope of solving the mystery, by means
of Mrs. Inglethorp’s correspondence on the fatal evening, had to be
abandoned.

Just before tea, I strolled down to tell Poirot of the new
disappointment, but found, to my annoyance, that he was once more out.

“Gone to London again?”

“Oh, no, monsieur, he has but taken the train to Tadminster. ‘To see a
young lady’s dispensary,’ he said.”

“Silly ass!” I ejaculated. “I told him Wednesday was the one day she
wasn’t there! Well, tell him to look us up to-morrow morning, will
you?”

“Certainly, monsieur.”

But, on the following day, no sign of Poirot. I was getting angry. He
was really treating us in the most cavalier fashion.

After lunch, Lawrence drew me aside, and asked if I was going down to
see him.

“No, I don’t think I shall. He can come up here if he wants to see us.”

“Oh!” Lawrence looked indeterminate. Something unusually nervous and
excited in his manner roused my curiosity.

“What is it?” I asked. “I could go if there’s anything special.”

“It’s nothing much, but—well, if you are going, will you tell him——” he
dropped his voice to a whisper—“I think I’ve found the extra
coffee-cup!”

I had almost forgotten that enigmatical message of Poirot’s, but now my
curiosity was aroused afresh.

Lawrence would say no more, so I decided that I would descend from my
high horse, and once more seek out Poirot at Leastways Cottage.

This time I was received with a smile. Monsieur Poirot was within.
Would I mount? I mounted accordingly.

Poirot was sitting by the table, his head buried in his hands. He
sprang up at my entrance.

“What is it?” I asked solicitously. “You are not ill, I trust?”

“No, no, not ill. But I decide an affair of great moment.”

“Whether to catch the criminal or not?” I asked facetiously.

But, to my great surprise, Poirot nodded gravely.

“‘To speak or not to speak,’ as your so great Shakespeare says, ‘that
is the question.’”

I did not trouble to correct the quotation.

“You are not serious, Poirot?”

“I am of the most serious. For the most serious of all things hangs in
the balance.”

“And that is?”

“A woman’s happiness, _mon ami_,” he said gravely.

I did not quite know what to say.

“The moment has come,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “and I do not know
what to do. For, see you, it is a big stake for which I play. No one
but I, Hercule Poirot, would attempt it!” And he tapped himself proudly
on the breast.

After pausing a few minutes respectfully, so as not to spoil his
effect, I gave him Lawrence’s message.

“Aha!” he cried. “So he has found the extra coffee-cup. That is good.
He has more intelligence than would appear, this long-faced Monsieur
Lawrence of yours!”

I did not myself think very highly of Lawrence’s intelligence; but I
forebore to contradict Poirot, and gently took him to task for
forgetting my instructions as to which were Cynthia’s days off.

“It is true. I have the head of a sieve. However, the other young lady
was most kind. She was sorry for my disappointment, and showed me
everything in the kindest way.”

“Oh, well, that’s all right, then, and you must go to tea with Cynthia
another day.”

I told him about the letter.

“I am sorry for that,” he said. “I always had hopes of that letter. But
no, it was not to be. This affair must all be unravelled from within.”
He tapped his forehead. “These little grey cells. It is ‘up to them’—as
you say over here.” Then, suddenly, he asked: “Are you a judge of
finger-marks, my friend?”

“No,” I said, rather surprised, “I know that there are no two
finger-marks alike, but that’s as far as my science goes.”

“Exactly.”

He unlocked a little drawer, and took out some photographs which he
laid on the table.

“I have numbered them, 1, 2, 3. Will you describe them to me?”

I studied the proofs attentively.

“All greatly magnified, I see. No. 1, I should say, are a man’s
finger-prints; thumb and first finger. No. 2 are a lady’s; they are
much smaller, and quite different in every way. No. 3”—I paused for
some time—“there seem to be a lot of confused finger-marks, but here,
very distinctly, are No. 1’s.”

“Overlapping the others?”

“Yes.”

“You recognize them beyond fail?”

“Oh, yes; they are identical.”

Poirot nodded, and gently taking the photographs from me locked them up
again.

“I suppose,” I said, “that as usual, you are not going to explain?”

“On the contrary. No. 1 were the finger-prints of Monsieur Lawrence.
No. 2 were those of Mademoiselle Cynthia. They are not important. I
merely obtained them for comparison. No. 3 is a little more
complicated.”

“Yes?”

“It is, as you see, highly magnified. You may have noticed a sort of
blur extending all across the picture. I will not describe to you the
special apparatus, dusting powder, etc., which I used. It is a
well-known process to the police, and by means of it you can obtain a
photograph of the finger-prints of any object in a very short space of
time. Well, my friend, you have seen the finger-marks—it remains to
tell you the particular object on which they had been left.”

“Go on—I am really excited.”

“_Eh bien!_ Photo No. 3 represents the highly magnified surface of a
tiny bottle in the top poison cupboard of the dispensary in the Red
Cross Hospital at Tadminster—which sounds like the house that Jack
built!”

“Good heavens!” I exclaimed. “But what were Lawrence Cavendish’s
finger-marks doing on it? He never went near the poison cupboard the
day we were there!”

“Oh, yes, he did!”

“Impossible! We were all together the whole time.”

Poirot shook his head.

“No, my friend, there was a moment when you were not all together.
There was a moment when you could not have been all together, or it
would not have been necessary to call to Monsieur Lawrence to come and
join you on the balcony.”

“I’d forgotten that,” I admitted. “But it was only for a moment.”

“Long enough.”

“Long enough for what?”

Poirot’s smile became rather enigmatical.

“Long enough for a gentleman who had once studied medicine to gratify a
very natural interest and curiosity.”

Our eyes met. Poirot’s were pleasantly vague. He got up and hummed a
little tune. I watched him suspiciously.

“Poirot,” I said, “what was in this particular little bottle?”

Poirot looked out of the window.

“Hydro-chloride of strychnine,” he said, over his shoulder, continuing
to hum.

“Good heavens!” I said it quite quietly. I was not surprised. I had
expected that answer.

“They use the pure hydro-chloride of strychnine very little—only
occasionally for pills. It is the official solution, Liq. Strychnine
Hydro-clor. that is used in most medicines. That is why the
finger-marks have remained undisturbed since then.”

“How did you manage to take this photograph?”

“I dropped my hat from the balcony,” explained Poirot simply. “Visitors
were not permitted below at that hour, so, in spite of my many
apologies, Mademoiselle Cynthia’s colleague had to go down and fetch it
for me.”

“Then you knew what you were going to find?”

“No, not at all. I merely realized that it was possible, from your
story, for Monsieur Lawrence to go to the poison cupboard. The
possibility had to be confirmed, or eliminated.”

“Poirot,” I said, “your gaiety does not deceive me. This is a very
important discovery.”

“I do not know,” said Poirot. “But one thing does strike me. No doubt
it has struck you too.”

“What is that?”

“Why, that there is altogether too much strychnine about this case.
This is the third time we run up against it. There was strychnine in
Mrs. Inglethorp’s tonic. There is the strychnine sold across the
counter at Styles St. Mary by Mace. Now we have more strychnine,
handled by one of the household. It is confusing; and, as you know, I
do not like confusion.”

Before I could reply, one of the other Belgians opened the door and
stuck his head in.

“There is a lady below, asking for Mr Hastings.”

“A lady?”

I jumped up. Poirot followed me down the narrow stairs. Mary Cavendish
was standing in the doorway.

“I have been visiting an old woman in the village,” she explained, “and
as Lawrence told me you were with Monsieur Poirot I thought I would
call for you.”

“Alas, madame,” said Poirot, “I thought you had come to honour me with
a visit!”

“I will some day, if you ask me,” she promised him, smiling.

“That is well. If you should need a father confessor, madame”—she
started ever so slightly—“remember, Papa Poirot is always at your
service.”

She stared at him for a few minutes, as though seeking to read some
deeper meaning into his words. Then she turned abruptly away.

“Come, will you not walk back with us too, Monsieur Poirot?”

“Enchanted, madame.”

All the way to Styles, Mary talked fast and feverishly. It struck me
that in some way she was nervous of Poirot’s eyes.

The weather had broken, and the sharp wind was almost autumnal in its
shrewishness. Mary shivered a little, and buttoned her black sports
coat closer. The wind through the trees made a mournful noise, like
some great giant sighing.

We walked up to the great door of Styles, and at once the knowledge
came to us that something was wrong.

Dorcas came running out to meet us. She was crying and wringing her
hands. I was aware of other servants huddled together in the
background, all eyes and ears.

“Oh, m’am! Oh, m’am! I don’t know how to tell you——”

“What is it, Dorcas?” I asked impatiently. “Tell us at once.”

“It’s those wicked detectives. They’ve arrested him—they’ve arrested
Mr. Cavendish!”

“Arrested Lawrence?” I gasped.

I saw a strange look come into Dorcas’s eyes.

“No, sir. Not Mr. Lawrence—Mr. John.”

Behind me, with a wild cry, Mary Cavendish fell heavily against me, and
as I turned to catch her I met the quiet triumph in Poirot’s eyes.




CHAPTER XI.
THE CASE FOR THE PROSECUTION


The trial of John Cavendish for the murder of his stepmother took place
two months later.

Of the intervening weeks I will say little, but my admiration and
sympathy went out unfeignedly to Mary Cavendish. She ranged herself
passionately on her husband’s side, scorning the mere idea of his
guilt, and fought for him tooth and nail.

I expressed my admiration to Poirot, and he nodded thoughtfully.

“Yes, she is of those women who show at their best in adversity. It
brings out all that is sweetest and truest in them. Her pride and her
jealousy have——”

“Jealousy?” I queried.

“Yes. Have you not realized that she is an unusually jealous woman? As
I was saying, her pride and jealousy have been laid aside. She thinks
of nothing but her husband, and the terrible fate that is hanging over
him.”

He spoke very feelingly, and I looked at him earnestly, remembering
that last afternoon, when he had been deliberating whether or not to
speak. With his tenderness for “a woman’s happiness,” I felt glad that
the decision had been taken out of his hands.

“Even now,” I said, “I can hardly believe it. You see, up to the very
last minute, I thought it was Lawrence!”

Poirot grinned.

“I know you did.”

“But John! My old friend John!”

“Every murderer is probably somebody’s old friend,” observed Poirot
philosophically. “You cannot mix up sentiment and reason.”

“I must say I think you might have given me a hint.”

“Perhaps, _mon ami_, I did not do so, just because he _was_ your old
friend.”

I was rather disconcerted by this, remembering how I had busily passed
on to John what I believed to be Poirot’s views concerning Bauerstein.
He, by the way, had been acquitted of the charge brought against him.
Nevertheless, although he had been too clever for them this time, and
the charge of espionage could not be brought home to him, his wings
were pretty well clipped for the future.

I asked Poirot whether he thought John would be condemned. To my
intense surprise, he replied that, on the contrary, he was extremely
likely to be acquitted.

“But, Poirot——” I protested.

“Oh, my friend, have I not said to you all along that I have no proofs.
It is one thing to know that a man is guilty, it is quite another
matter to prove him so. And, in this case, there is terribly little
evidence. That is the whole trouble. I, Hercule Poirot, know, but I
lack the last link in my chain. And unless I can find that missing
link——” He shook his head gravely.

“When did you first suspect John Cavendish?” I asked, after a minute or
two.

“Did you not suspect him at all?”

“No, indeed.”

“Not after that fragment of conversation you overheard between Mrs.
Cavendish and her mother-in-law, and her subsequent lack of frankness
at the inquest?”

“No.”

“Did you not put two and two together, and reflect that if it was not
Alfred Inglethorp who was quarrelling with his wife—and you remember,
he strenuously denied it at the inquest—it must be either Lawrence or
John. Now, if it was Lawrence, Mary Cavendish’s conduct was just as
inexplicable. But if, on the other hand, it was John, the whole thing
was explained quite naturally.”

“So,” I cried, a light breaking in upon me, “it was John who quarrelled
with his mother that afternoon?”

“Exactly.”

“And you have known this all along?”

“Certainly. Mrs. Cavendish’s behaviour could only be explained that
way.”

“And yet you say he may be acquitted?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“Certainly I do. At the police court proceedings, we shall hear the
case for the prosecution, but in all probability his solicitors will
advise him to reserve his defence. That will be sprung upon us at the
trial. And—ah, by the way, I have a word of caution to give you, my
friend. I must not appear in the case.”

“What?”

“No. Officially, I have nothing to do with it. Until I have found that
last link in my chain, I must remain behind the scenes. Mrs. Cavendish
must think I am working for her husband, not against him.”

“I say, that’s playing it a bit low down,” I protested.

“Not at all. We have to deal with a most clever and unscrupulous man,
and we must use any means in our power—otherwise he will slip through
our fingers. That is why I have been careful to remain in the
background. All the discoveries have been made by Japp, and Japp will
take all the credit. If I am called upon to give evidence at all”—he
smiled broadly—“it will probably be as a witness for the defence.”

I could hardly believe my ears.

“It is quite _en règle_,” continued Poirot. “Strangely enough, I can
give evidence that will demolish one contention of the prosecution.”

“Which one?”

“The one that relates to the destruction of the will. John Cavendish
did not destroy that will.”

Poirot was a true prophet. I will not go into the details of the police
court proceedings, as it involves many tiresome repetitions. I will
merely state baldly that John Cavendish reserved his defence, and was
duly committed for trial.

September found us all in London. Mary took a house in Kensington,
Poirot being included in the family party.

I myself had been given a job at the War Office, so was able to see
them continually.

As the weeks went by, the state of Poirot’s nerves grew worse and
worse. That “last link” he talked about was still lacking. Privately, I
hoped it might remain so, for what happiness could there be for Mary,
if John were not acquitted?

On September 15th John Cavendish appeared in the dock at the Old
Bailey, charged with “The Wilful Murder of Emily Agnes Inglethorp,” and
pleaded “Not Guilty.”

Sir Ernest Heavywether, the famous K.C., had been engaged to defend
him.

Mr. Philips, K.C., opened the case for the Crown.

The murder, he said, was a most premeditated and cold-blooded one. It
was neither more nor less than the deliberate poisoning of a fond and
trusting woman by the stepson to whom she had been more than a mother.
Ever since his boyhood, she had supported him. He and his wife had
lived at Styles Court in every luxury, surrounded by her care and
attention. She had been their kind and generous benefactress.

He proposed to call witnesses to show how the prisoner, a profligate
and spendthrift, had been at the end of his financial tether, and had
also been carrying on an intrigue with a certain Mrs. Raikes, a
neighbouring farmer’s wife. This having come to his stepmother’s ears,
she taxed him with it on the afternoon before her death, and a quarrel
ensued, part of which was overheard. On the previous day, the prisoner
had purchased strychnine at the village chemist’s shop, wearing a
disguise by means of which he hoped to throw the onus of the crime upon
another man—to wit, Mrs. Inglethorp’s husband, of whom he had been
bitterly jealous. Luckily for Mr. Inglethorp, he had been able to
produce an unimpeachable alibi.

On the afternoon of July 17th, continued Counsel, immediately after the
quarrel with her son, Mrs. Inglethorp made a new will. This will was
found destroyed in the grate of her bedroom the following morning, but
evidence had come to light which showed that it had been drawn up in
favour of her husband. Deceased had already made a will in his favour
before her marriage, but—and Mr. Philips wagged an expressive
forefinger—the prisoner was not aware of that. What had induced the
deceased to make a fresh will, with the old one still extant, he could
not say. She was an old lady, and might possibly have forgotten the
former one; or—this seemed to him more likely—she may have had an idea
that it was revoked by her marriage, as there had been some
conversation on the subject. Ladies were not always very well versed in
legal knowledge. She had, about a year before, executed a will in
favour of the prisoner. He would call evidence to show that it was the
prisoner who ultimately handed his stepmother her coffee on the fatal
night. Later in the evening, he had sought admission to her room, on
which occasion, no doubt, he found an opportunity of destroying the
will which, as far as he knew, would render the one in his favour
valid.

The prisoner had been arrested in consequence of the discovery, in his
room, by Detective Inspector Japp—a most brilliant officer—of the
identical phial of strychnine which had been sold at the village
chemist’s to the supposed Mr. Inglethorp on the day before the murder.
It would be for the jury to decide whether or not these damning facts
constituted an overwhelming proof of the prisoner’s guilt.

And, subtly implying that a jury which did not so decide, was quite
unthinkable, Mr. Philips sat down and wiped his forehead.

The first witnesses for the prosecution were mostly those who had been
called at the inquest, the medical evidence being again taken first.

Sir Ernest Heavywether, who was famous all over England for the
unscrupulous manner in which he bullied witnesses, only asked two
questions.

“I take it, Dr. Bauerstein, that strychnine, as a drug, acts quickly?”

“Yes.”

“And that you are unable to account for the delay in this case?”

“Yes.”

“Thank you.”

Mr. Mace identified the phial handed him by Counsel as that sold by him
to “Mr. Inglethorp.” Pressed, he admitted that he only knew Mr.
Inglethorp by sight. He had never spoken to him. The witness was not
cross-examined.

Alfred Inglethorp was called, and denied having purchased the poison.
He also denied having quarrelled with his wife. Various witnesses
testified to the accuracy of these statements.

The gardeners’ evidence, as to the witnessing of the will was taken,
and then Dorcas was called.

Dorcas, faithful to her “young gentlemen,” denied strenuously that it
could have been John’s voice she heard, and resolutely declared, in the
teeth of everything, that it was Mr. Inglethorp who had been in the
boudoir with her mistress. A rather wistful smile passed across the
face of the prisoner in the dock. He knew only too well how useless her
gallant defiance was, since it was not the object of the defence to
deny this point. Mrs. Cavendish, of course, could not be called upon to
give evidence against her husband.

After various questions on other matters, Mr. Philips asked:

“In the month of June last, do you remember a parcel arriving for Mr.
Lawrence Cavendish from Parkson’s?”

Dorcas shook her head.

“I don’t remember, sir. It may have done, but Mr. Lawrence was away
from home part of June.”

“In the event of a parcel arriving for him whilst he was away, what
would be done with it?”

“It would either be put in his room or sent on after him.”

“By you?”

“No, sir, I should leave it on the hall table. It would be Miss Howard
who would attend to anything like that.”

Evelyn Howard was called and, after being examined on other points, was
questioned as to the parcel.

“Don’t remember. Lots of parcels come. Can’t remember one special one.”

“You do not know if it was sent after Mr. Lawrence Cavendish to Wales,
or whether it was put in his room?”

“Don’t think it was sent after him. Should have remembered it if it
was.”

“Supposing a parcel arrived addressed to Mr. Lawrence Cavendish, and
afterwards it disappeared, should you remark its absence?”

“No, don’t think so. I should think someone had taken charge of it.”

“I believe, Miss Howard, that it was you who found this sheet of brown
paper?” He held up the same dusty piece which Poirot and I had examined
in the morning-room at Styles.

“Yes, I did.”

“How did you come to look for it?”

“The Belgian detective who was employed on the case asked me to search
for it.”

“Where did you eventually discover it?”

“On the top of—of—a wardrobe.”

“On top of the prisoner’s wardrobe?”

“I—I believe so.”

“Did you not find it yourself?”

“Yes.”

“Then you must know where you found it?”

“Yes, it was on the prisoner’s wardrobe.”

“That is better.”

An assistant from Parkson’s, Theatrical Costumiers, testified that on
June 29th, they had supplied a black beard to Mr. L. Cavendish, as
requested. It was ordered by letter, and a postal order was enclosed.
No, they had not kept the letter. All transactions were entered in
their books. They had sent the beard, as directed, to “L. Cavendish,
Esq., Styles Court.”

Sir Ernest Heavywether rose ponderously.

“Where was the letter written from?”

“From Styles Court.”

“The same address to which you sent the parcel?”

“Yes.”

“And the letter came from there?”

“Yes.”

Like a beast of prey, Heavywether fell upon him:

“How do you know?”

“I—I don’t understand.”

“How do you know that letter came from Styles? Did you notice the
postmark?”

“No—but——”

“Ah, you did _not_ notice the postmark! And yet you affirm so
confidently that it came from Styles. It might, in fact, have been any
postmark?”

“Y—es.”

“In fact, the letter, though written on stamped notepaper, might have
been posted from anywhere? From Wales, for instance?”

The witness admitted that such might be the case, and Sir Ernest
signified that he was satisfied.

Elizabeth Wells, second housemaid at Styles, stated that after she had
gone to bed she remembered that she had bolted the front door, instead
of leaving it on the latch as Mr. Inglethorp had requested. She had
accordingly gone downstairs again to rectify her error. Hearing a
slight noise in the West wing, she had peeped along the passage, and
had seen Mr. John Cavendish knocking at Mrs. Inglethorp’s door.

Sir Ernest Heavywether made short work of her, and under his unmerciful
bullying she contradicted herself hopelessly, and Sir Ernest sat down
again with a satisfied smile on his face.

With the evidence of Annie, as to the candle grease on the floor, and
as to seeing the prisoner take the coffee into the boudoir, the
proceedings were adjourned until the following day.

As we went home, Mary Cavendish spoke bitterly against the prosecuting
counsel.

“That hateful man! What a net he has drawn around my poor John! How he
twisted every little fact until he made it seem what it wasn’t!”

“Well,” I said consolingly, “it will be the other way about to-morrow.”

“Yes,” she said meditatively; then suddenly dropped her voice. “Mr.
Hastings, you do not think—surely it could not have been Lawrence—Oh,
no, that could not be!”

But I myself was puzzled, and as soon as I was alone with Poirot I
asked him what he thought Sir Ernest was driving at.

“Ah!” said Poirot appreciatively. “He is a clever man, that Sir
Ernest.”

“Do you think he believes Lawrence guilty?”

“I do not think he believes or cares anything! No, what he is trying
for is to create such confusion in the minds of the jury that they are
divided in their opinion as to which brother did it. He is endeavouring
to make out that there is quite as much evidence against Lawrence as
against John—and I am not at all sure that he will not succeed.”

Detective-inspector Japp was the first witness called when the trial
was reopened, and gave his evidence succinctly and briefly. After
relating the earlier events, he proceeded:

“Acting on information received, Superintendent Summerhaye and myself
searched the prisoner’s room, during his temporary absence from the
house. In his chest of drawers, hidden beneath some underclothing, we
found: first, a pair of gold-rimmed pince-nez similar to those worn by
Mr. Inglethorp”—these were exhibited—“secondly, this phial.”

The phial was that already recognized by the chemist’s assistant, a
tiny bottle of blue glass, containing a few grains of a white
crystalline powder, and labelled: “Strychnine Hydro-chloride. POISON.”

A fresh piece of evidence discovered by the detectives since the police
court proceedings was a long, almost new piece of blotting-paper. It
had been found in Mrs. Inglethorp’s cheque book, and on being reversed
at a mirror, showed clearly the words: “. . . erything of which I die
possessed I leave to my beloved husband Alfred Ing...” This placed
beyond question the fact that the destroyed will had been in favour of
the deceased lady’s husband. Japp then produced the charred fragment of
paper recovered from the grate, and this, with the discovery of the
beard in the attic, completed his evidence.

But Sir Ernest’s cross-examination was yet to come.

“What day was it when you searched the prisoner’s room?”

“Tuesday, the 24th of July.”

“Exactly a week after the tragedy?”

“Yes.”

“You found these two objects, you say, in the chest of drawers. Was the
drawer unlocked?”

“Yes.”

“Does it not strike you as unlikely that a man who had committed a
crime should keep the evidence of it in an unlocked drawer for anyone
to find?”

“He might have stowed them there in a hurry.”

“But you have just said it was a whole week since the crime. He would
have had ample time to remove them and destroy them.”

“Perhaps.”

“There is no perhaps about it. Would he, or would he not have had
plenty of time to remove and destroy them?”

“Yes.”

“Was the pile of underclothes under which the things were hidden heavy
or light?”

“Heavyish.”

“In other words, it was winter underclothing. Obviously, the prisoner
would not be likely to go to that drawer?”

“Perhaps not.”

“Kindly answer my question. Would the prisoner, in the hottest week of
a hot summer, be likely to go to a drawer containing winter
underclothing. Yes, or no?”

“No.”

“In that case, is it not possible that the articles in question might
have been put there by a third person, and that the prisoner was quite
unaware of their presence?”

“I should not think it likely.”

“But it is possible?”

“Yes.”

“That is all.”

More evidence followed. Evidence as to the financial difficulties in
which the prisoner had found himself at the end of July. Evidence as to
his intrigue with Mrs. Raikes—poor Mary, that must have been bitter
hearing for a woman of her pride. Evelyn Howard had been right in her
facts, though her animosity against Alfred Inglethorp had caused her to
jump to the conclusion that he was the person concerned.

Lawrence Cavendish was then put into the box. In a low voice, in answer
to Mr. Philips’ questions, he denied having ordered anything from
Parkson’s in June. In fact, on June 29th, he had been staying away, in
Wales.

Instantly, Sir Ernest’s chin was shooting pugnaciously forward.

“You deny having ordered a black beard from Parkson’s on June 29th?”

“I do.”

“Ah! In the event of anything happening to your brother, who will
inherit Styles Court?”

The brutality of the question called a flush to Lawrence’s pale face.
The judge gave vent to a faint murmur of disapprobation, and the
prisoner in the dock leant forward angrily.

Heavywether cared nothing for his client’s anger.

“Answer my question, if you please.”

“I suppose,” said Lawrence quietly, “that I should.”

“What do you mean by you ‘suppose’? Your brother has no children. You
_would_ inherit it, wouldn’t you?”

“Yes.”

“Ah, that’s better,” said Heavywether, with ferocious geniality. “And
you’d inherit a good slice of money too, wouldn’t you?”

“Really, Sir Ernest,” protested the judge, “these questions are not
relevant.”

Sir Ernest bowed, and having shot his arrow proceeded.

“On Tuesday, the 17th July, you went, I believe, with another guest, to
visit the dispensary at the Red Cross Hospital in Tadminster?”

“Yes.”

“Did you—while you happened to be alone for a few seconds—unlock the
poison cupboard, and examine some of the bottles?”

“I—I—may have done so.”

“I put it to you that you did do so?”

“Yes.”

Sir Ernest fairly shot the next question at him.

“Did you examine one bottle in particular?”

“No, I do not think so.”

“Be careful, Mr. Cavendish. I am referring to a little bottle of
Hydro-chloride of Strychnine.”

Lawrence was turning a sickly greenish colour.

“N—o—I am sure I didn’t.”

“Then how do you account for the fact that you left the unmistakable
impress of your finger-prints on it?”

The bullying manner was highly efficacious with a nervous disposition.

“I—I suppose I must have taken up the bottle.”

“I suppose so too! Did you abstract any of the contents of the bottle?”

“Certainly not.”

“Then why did you take it up?”

“I once studied to be a doctor. Such things naturally interest me.”

“Ah! So poisons ‘naturally interest’ you, do they? Still, you waited to
be alone before gratifying that ‘interest’ of yours?”

“That was pure chance. If the others had been there, I should have done
just the same.”

“Still, as it happens, the others were not there?”

“No, but——”

“In fact, during the whole afternoon, you were only alone for a couple
of minutes, and it happened—I say, it happened—to be during those two
minutes that you displayed your ‘natural interest’ in Hydro-chloride of
Strychnine?”

Lawrence stammered pitiably.

“I—I——”

With a satisfied and expressive countenance, Sir Ernest observed:

“I have nothing more to ask you, Mr. Cavendish.”

This bit of cross-examination had caused great excitement in court. The
heads of the many fashionably attired women present were busily laid
together, and their whispers became so loud that the judge angrily
threatened to have the court cleared if there was not immediate
silence.

There was little more evidence. The hand-writing experts were called
upon for their opinion of the signature of “Alfred Inglethorp” in the
chemist’s poison register. They all declared unanimously that it was
certainly not his hand-writing, and gave it as their view that it might
be that of the prisoner disguised. Cross-examined, they admitted that
it might be the prisoner’s hand-writing cleverly counterfeited.

Sir Ernest Heavywether’s speech in opening the case for the defence was
not a long one, but it was backed by the full force of his emphatic
manner. Never, he said, in the course of his long experience, had he
known a charge of murder rest on slighter evidence. Not only was it
entirely circumstantial, but the greater part of it was practically
unproved. Let them take the testimony they had heard and sift it
impartially. The strychnine had been found in a drawer in the
prisoner’s room. That drawer was an unlocked one, as he had pointed
out, and he submitted that there was no evidence to prove that it was
the prisoner who had concealed the poison there. It was, in fact, a
wicked and malicious attempt on the part of some third person to fix
the crime on the prisoner. The prosecution had been unable to produce a
shred of evidence in support of their contention that it was the
prisoner who ordered the black beard from Parkson’s. The quarrel which
had taken place between prisoner and his stepmother was freely
admitted, but both it and his financial embarrassments had been grossly
exaggerated.

His learned friend—Sir Ernest nodded carelessly at Mr. Philips—had
stated that if the prisoner were an innocent man, he would have come
forward at the inquest to explain that it was he, and not Mr.
Inglethorp, who had been the participator in the quarrel. He thought
the facts had been misrepresented. What had actually occurred was this.
The prisoner, returning to the house on Tuesday evening, had been
authoritatively told that there had been a violent quarrel between Mr.
and Mrs. Inglethorp. No suspicion had entered the prisoner’s head that
anyone could possibly have mistaken his voice for that of Mr.
Inglethorp. He naturally concluded that his stepmother had had two
quarrels.

The prosecution averred that on Monday, July 16th, the prisoner had
entered the chemist’s shop in the village, disguised as Mr. Inglethorp.
The prisoner, on the contrary, was at that time at a lonely spot called
Marston’s Spinney, where he had been summoned by an anonymous note,
couched in blackmailing terms, and threatening to reveal certain
matters to his wife unless he complied with its demands. The prisoner
had, accordingly, gone to the appointed spot, and after waiting there
vainly for half an hour had returned home. Unfortunately, he had met
with no one on the way there or back who could vouch for the truth of
his story, but luckily he had kept the note, and it would be produced
as evidence.

As for the statement relating to the destruction of the will, the
prisoner had formerly practised at the Bar, and was perfectly well
aware that the will made in his favour a year before was automatically
revoked by his stepmother’s remarriage. He would call evidence to show
who did destroy the will, and it was possible that that might open up
quite a new view of the case.

Finally, he would point out to the jury that there was evidence against
other people besides John Cavendish. He would direct their attention to
the fact that the evidence against Mr. Lawrence Cavendish was quite as
strong, if not stronger than that against his brother.

He would now call the prisoner.

John acquitted himself well in the witness-box. Under Sir Ernest’s
skilful handling, he told his tale credibly and well. The anonymous
note received by him was produced, and handed to the jury to examine.
The readiness with which he admitted his financial difficulties, and
the disagreement with his stepmother, lent value to his denials.

At the close of his examination, he paused, and said:

“I should like to make one thing clear. I utterly reject and disapprove
of Sir Ernest Heavywether’s insinuations against my brother. My
brother, I am convinced, had no more to do with the crime than I have.”

Sir Ernest merely smiled, and noted with a sharp eye that John’s
protest had produced a very favourable impression on the jury.

Then the cross-examination began.

“I understand you to say that it never entered your head that the
witnesses at the inquest could possibly have mistaken your voice for
that of Mr. Inglethorp. Is not that very surprising?”

“No, I don’t think so. I was told there had been a quarrel between my
mother and Mr. Inglethorp, and it never occurred to me that such was
not really the case.”

“Not when the servant Dorcas repeated certain fragments of the
conversation—fragments which you must have recognized?”

“I did not recognize them.”

“Your memory must be unusually short!”

“No, but we were both angry, and, I think, said more than we meant. I
paid very little attention to my mother’s actual words.”

Mr. Philips’ incredulous sniff was a triumph of forensic skill. He
passed on to the subject of the note.

“You have produced this note very opportunely. Tell me, is there
nothing familiar about the hand-writing of it?”

“Not that I know of.”

“Do you not think that it bears a marked resemblance to your own
hand-writing—carelessly disguised?”

“No, I do not think so.”

“I put it to you that it is your own hand-writing!”

“No.”

“I put it to you that, anxious to prove an alibi, you conceived the
idea of a fictitious and rather incredible appointment, and wrote this
note yourself in order to bear out your statement!”

“No.”

“Is it not a fact that, at the time you claim to have been waiting
about at a solitary and unfrequented spot, you were really in the
chemist’s shop in Styles St. Mary, where you purchased strychnine in
the name of Alfred Inglethorp?”

“No, that is a lie.”

“I put it to you that, wearing a suit of Mr. Inglethorp’s clothes, with
a black beard trimmed to resemble his, you were there—and signed the
register in his name!”

“That is absolutely untrue.”

“Then I will leave the remarkable similarity of hand-writing between
the note, the register, and your own, to the consideration of the
jury,” said Mr. Philips, and sat down with the air of a man who has
done his duty, but who was nevertheless horrified by such deliberate
perjury.

After this, as it was growing late, the case was adjourned till Monday.

Poirot, I noticed, was looking profoundly discouraged. He had that
little frown between the eyes that I knew so well.

“What is it, Poirot?” I inquired.

“Ah, _mon ami_, things are going badly, badly.”

In spite of myself, my heart gave a leap of relief. Evidently there was
a likelihood of John Cavendish being acquitted.

When we reached the house, my little friend waved aside Mary’s offer of
tea.

“No, I thank you, madame. I will mount to my room.”

I followed him. Still frowning, he went across to the desk and took out
a small pack of patience cards. Then he drew up a chair to the table,
and, to my utter amazement, began solemnly to build card houses!

My jaw dropped involuntarily, and he said at once:

“No, _mon ami_, I am not in my second childhood! I steady my nerves,
that is all. This employment requires precision of the fingers. With
precision of the fingers goes precision of the brain. And never have I
needed that more than now!”

“What is the trouble?” I asked.

With a great thump on the table, Poirot demolished his carefully built
up edifice.

“It is this, _mon ami!_ That I can build card houses seven stories
high, but I cannot”—thump—“find”—thump—“ that last link of which I
spoke to you.”

I could not quite tell what to say, so I held my peace, and he began
slowly building up the cards again, speaking in jerks as he did so.

“It is done—so! By placing—one card—on another—with
mathematical—precision!”

I watched the card house rising under his hands, story by story. He
never hesitated or faltered. It was really almost like a conjuring
trick.

“What a steady hand you’ve got,” I remarked. “I believe I’ve only seen
your hand shake once.”

“On an occasion when I was enraged, without doubt,” observed Poirot,
with great placidity.

“Yes indeed! You were in a towering rage. Do you remember? It was when
you discovered that the lock of the despatch-case in Mrs. Inglethorp’s
bedroom had been forced. You stood by the mantelpiece, twiddling the
things on it in your usual fashion, and your hand shook like a leaf! I
must say——”

But I stopped suddenly. For Poirot, uttering a hoarse and inarticulate
cry, again annihilated his masterpiece of cards, and putting his hands
over his eyes swayed backwards and forwards, apparently suffering the
keenest agony.

“Good heavens, Poirot!” I cried. “What is the matter? Are you taken
ill?”

“No, no,” he gasped. “It is—it is—that I have an idea!”

“Oh!” I exclaimed, much relieved. “One of your ‘little ideas’?”

“Ah, _ma foi_, no!” replied Poirot frankly. “This time it is an idea
gigantic! Stupendous! And you—_you_, my friend, have given it to me!”

Suddenly clasping me in his arms, he kissed me warmly on both cheeks,
and before I had recovered from my surprise ran headlong from the room.

Mary Cavendish entered at that moment.

“What _is_ the matter with Monsieur Poirot? He rushed past me crying
out: ‘A garage! For the love of Heaven, direct me to a garage, madame!’
And, before I could answer, he had dashed out into the street.”

I hurried to the window. True enough, there he was, tearing down the
street, hatless, and gesticulating as he went. I turned to Mary with a
gesture of despair.

“He’ll be stopped by a policeman in another minute. There he goes,
round the corner!”

Our eyes met, and we stared helplessly at one another.

“What can be the matter?”

I shook my head.

“I don’t know. He was building card houses, when suddenly he said he
had an idea, and rushed off as you saw.”

“Well,” said Mary, “I expect he will be back before dinner.”

But night fell, and Poirot had not returned.




CHAPTER XII.
THE LAST LINK


Poirot’s abrupt departure had intrigued us all greatly. Sunday morning
wore away, and still he did not reappear. But about three o’clock a
ferocious and prolonged hooting outside drove us to the window, to see
Poirot alighting from a car, accompanied by Japp and Summerhaye. The
little man was transformed. He radiated an absurd complacency. He bowed
with exaggerated respect to Mary Cavendish.

“Madame, I have your permission to hold a little _réunion_ in the
_salon_? It is necessary for everyone to attend.”

Mary smiled sadly.

“You know, Monsieur Poirot, that you have _carte blanche_ in every
way.”

“You are too amiable, madame.”

Still beaming, Poirot marshalled us all into the drawing-room, bringing
forward chairs as he did so.

“Miss Howard—here. Mademoiselle Cynthia. Monsieur Lawrence. The good
Dorcas. And Annie. _Bien!_ We must delay our proceedings a few minutes
until Mr. Inglethorp arrives. I have sent him a note.”

Miss Howard rose immediately from her seat.

“If that man comes into the house, I leave it!”

“No, no!” Poirot went up to her and pleaded in a low voice.

Finally Miss Howard consented to return to her chair. A few minutes
later Alfred Inglethorp entered the room.

The company once assembled, Poirot rose from his seat with the air of a
popular lecturer, and bowed politely to his audience.

“_Messieurs, mesdames_, as you all know, I was called in by Monsieur
John Cavendish to investigate this case. I at once examined the bedroom
of the deceased which, by the advice of the doctors, had been kept
locked, and was consequently exactly as it had been when the tragedy
occurred. I found: first, a fragment of green material; second, a stain
on the carpet near the window, still damp; thirdly, an empty box of
bromide powders.

“To take the fragment of green material first, I found it caught in the
bolt of the communicating door between that room and the adjoining one
occupied by Mademoiselle Cynthia. I handed the fragment over to the
police who did not consider it of much importance. Nor did they
recognize it for what it was—a piece torn from a green land armlet.”

There was a little stir of excitement.

“Now there was only one person at Styles who worked on the land—Mrs.
Cavendish. Therefore it must have been Mrs. Cavendish who entered the
deceased’s room through the door communicating with Mademoiselle
Cynthia’s room.”

“But that door was bolted on the inside!” I cried.

“When I examined the room, yes. But in the first place we have only her
word for it, since it was she who tried that particular door and
reported it fastened. In the ensuing confusion she would have had ample
opportunity to shoot the bolt across. I took an early opportunity of
verifying my conjectures. To begin with, the fragment corresponds
exactly with a tear in Mrs. Cavendish’s armlet. Also, at the inquest,
Mrs. Cavendish declared that she had heard, from her own room, the fall
of the table by the bed. I took an early opportunity of testing that
statement by stationing my friend Monsieur Hastings in the left wing of
the building, just outside Mrs. Cavendish’s door. I myself, in company
with the police, went to the deceased’s room, and whilst there I,
apparently accidentally, knocked over the table in question, but found
that, as I had expected, Monsieur Hastings had heard no sound at all.
This confirmed my belief that Mrs. Cavendish was not speaking the truth
when she declared that she had been dressing in her room at the time of
the tragedy. In fact, I was convinced that, far from having been in her
own room, Mrs. Cavendish was actually in the deceased’s room when the
alarm was given.”

I shot a quick glance at Mary. She was very pale, but smiling.

“I proceeded to reason on that assumption. Mrs. Cavendish is in her
mother-in-law’s room. We will say that she is seeking for something and
has not yet found it. Suddenly Mrs. Inglethorp awakens and is seized
with an alarming paroxysm. She flings out her arm, overturning the bed
table, and then pulls desperately at the bell. Mrs. Cavendish,
startled, drops her candle, scattering the grease on the carpet. She
picks it up, and retreats quickly to Mademoiselle Cynthia’s room,
closing the door behind her. She hurries out into the passage, for the
servants must not find her where she is. But it is too late! Already
footsteps are echoing along the gallery which connects the two wings.
What can she do? Quick as thought, she hurries back to the young girl’s
room, and starts shaking her awake. The hastily aroused household come
trooping down the passage. They are all busily battering at Mrs.
Inglethorp’s door. It occurs to nobody that Mrs. Cavendish has not
arrived with the rest, but—and this is significant—I can find no one
who saw her come from the other wing.” He looked at Mary Cavendish. “Am
I right, madame?”

She bowed her head.

“Quite right, monsieur. You understand that, if I had thought I would
do my husband any good by revealing these facts, I would have done so.
But it did not seem to me to bear upon the question of his guilt or
innocence.”

“In a sense, that is correct, madame. But it cleared my mind of many
misconceptions, and left me free to see other facts in their true
significance.”

“The will!” cried Lawrence. “Then it was you, Mary, who destroyed the
will?”

She shook her head, and Poirot shook his also.

“No,” he said quietly. “There is only one person who could possibly
have destroyed that will—Mrs. Inglethorp herself!”

“Impossible!” I exclaimed. “She had only made it out that very
afternoon!”

“Nevertheless, _mon ami_, it was Mrs. Inglethorp. Because, in no other
way can you account for the fact that, on one of the hottest days of
the year, Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire to be lighted in her room.”

I gave a gasp. What idiots we had been never to think of that fire as
being incongruous! Poirot was continuing:

“The temperature on that day, messieurs, was 80 degrees in the shade.
Yet Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire! Why? Because she wished to destroy
something, and could think of no other way. You will remember that, in
consequence of the War economics practiced at Styles, no waste paper
was thrown away. There was therefore no means of destroying a thick
document such as a will. The moment I heard of a fire being lighted in
Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, I leaped to the conclusion that it was to
destroy some important document—possibly a will. So the discovery of
the charred fragment in the grate was no surprise to me. I did not, of
course, know at the time that the will in question had only been made
this afternoon, and I will admit that, when I learnt that fact, I fell
into a grievous error. I came to the conclusion that Mrs. Inglethorp’s
determination to destroy her will arose as a direct consequence of the
quarrel she had that afternoon, and that therefore the quarrel took
place after, and not before the making of the will.

“Here, as we know, I was wrong, and I was forced to abandon that idea.
I faced the problem from a new standpoint. Now, at four o’clock, Dorcas
overheard her mistress saying angrily: ‘You need not think that any
fear of publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.”
I conjectured, and conjectured rightly, that these words were
addressed, not to her husband, but to Mr. John Cavendish. At five
o’clock, an hour later, she uses almost the same words, but the
standpoint is different. She admits to Dorcas, ‘I don’t know what to
do; scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing.’ At four
o’clock she has been angry, but completely mistress of herself. At five
o’clock she is in violent distress, and speaks of having had a great
shock.

“Looking at the matter psychologically, I drew one deduction which I
was convinced was correct. The second ‘scandal’ she spoke of was not
the same as the first—and it concerned herself!

“Let us reconstruct. At four o’clock, Mrs. Inglethorp quarrels with her
son, and threatens to denounce him to his wife—who, by the way,
overheard the greater part of the conversation. At four-thirty, Mrs.
Inglethorp, in consequence of a conversation on the validity of wills,
makes a will in favour of her husband, which the two gardeners witness.
At five o’clock, Dorcas finds her mistress in a state of considerable
agitation, with a slip of paper—‘a letter,’ Dorcas thinks—in her hand,
and it is then that she orders the fire in her room to be lighted.
Presumably, then, between four-thirty and five o’clock, something has
occurred to occasion a complete revolution of feeling, since she is now
as anxious to destroy the will, as she was before to make it. What was
that something?

“As far as we know, she was quite alone during that half-hour. Nobody
entered or left that boudoir. What then occasioned this sudden change
of sentiment?

“One can only guess, but I believe my guess to be correct. Mrs.
Inglethorp had no stamps in her desk. We know this, because later she
asked Dorcas to bring her some. Now in the opposite corner of the room
stood her husband’s desk—locked. She was anxious to find some stamps,
and, according to my theory, she tried her own keys in the desk. That
one of them fitted I know. She therefore opened the desk, and in
searching for the stamps she came across something else—that slip of
paper which Dorcas saw in her hand, and which assuredly was never meant
for Mrs. Inglethorp’s eyes. On the other hand, Mrs. Cavendish believed
that the slip of paper to which her mother-in-law clung so tenaciously
was a written proof of her own husband’s infidelity. She demanded it
from Mrs. Inglethorp who assured her, quite truly, that it had nothing
to do with that matter. Mrs. Cavendish did not believe her. She thought
that Mrs. Inglethorp was shielding her stepson. Now Mrs. Cavendish is a
very resolute woman, and, behind her mask of reserve, she was madly
jealous of her husband. She determined to get hold of that paper at all
costs, and in this resolution chance came to her aid. She happened to
pick up the key of Mrs. Inglethorp’s despatch-case, which had been lost
that morning. She knew that her mother-in-law invariably kept all
important papers in this particular case.

“Mrs. Cavendish, therefore, made her plans as only a woman driven
desperate through jealousy could have done. Some time in the evening
she unbolted the door leading into Mademoiselle Cynthia’s room.
Possibly she applied oil to the hinges, for I found that it opened
quite noiselessly when I tried it. She put off her project until the
early hours of the morning as being safer, since the servants were
accustomed to hearing her move about her room at that time. She dressed
completely in her land kit, and made her way quietly through
Mademoiselle Cynthia’s room into that of Mrs. Inglethorp.”

He paused a moment, and Cynthia interrupted:

“But I should have woken up if anyone had come through my room?”

“Not if you were drugged, mademoiselle.”

“Drugged?”

“_Mais, oui!_”

“You remember”—he addressed us collectively again—“that through all the
tumult and noise next door Mademoiselle Cynthia slept. That admitted of
two possibilities. Either her sleep was feigned—which I did not
believe—or her unconsciousness was induced by artificial means.

“With this latter idea in my mind, I examined all the coffee-cups most
carefully, remembering that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had brought
Mademoiselle Cynthia her coffee the night before. I took a sample from
each cup, and had them analysed—with no result. I had counted the cups
carefully, in the event of one having been removed. Six persons had
taken coffee, and six cups were duly found. I had to confess myself
mistaken.

“Then I discovered that I had been guilty of a very grave oversight.
Coffee had been brought in for seven persons, not six, for Dr.
Bauerstein had been there that evening. This changed the face of the
whole affair, for there was now one cup missing. The servants noticed
nothing, since Annie, the housemaid, who took in the coffee, brought in
seven cups, not knowing that Mr. Inglethorp never drank it, whereas
Dorcas, who cleared them away the following morning, found six as
usual—or strictly speaking she found five, the sixth being the one
found broken in Mrs. Inglethorp’s room.

“I was confident that the missing cup was that of Mademoiselle Cynthia.
I had an additional reason for that belief in the fact that all the
cups found contained sugar, which Mademoiselle Cynthia never took in
her coffee. My attention was attracted by the story of Annie about some
‘salt’ on the tray of cocoa which she took every night to Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room. I accordingly secured a sample of that cocoa, and
sent it to be analysed.”

“But that had already been done by Dr. Bauerstein,” said Lawrence
quickly.

“Not exactly. The analyst was asked by him to report whether strychnine
was, or was not, present. He did not have it tested, as I did, for a
narcotic.”

“For a narcotic?”

“Yes. Here is the analyst’s report. Mrs. Cavendish administered a safe,
but effectual, narcotic to both Mrs. Inglethorp and Mademoiselle
Cynthia. And it is possible that she had a _mauvais quart d’heure_ in
consequence! Imagine her feelings when her mother-in-law is suddenly
taken ill and dies, and immediately after she hears the word ‘Poison’!
She has believed that the sleeping draught she administered was
perfectly harmless, but there is no doubt that for one terrible moment
she must have feared that Mrs. Inglethorp’s death lay at her door. She
is seized with panic, and under its influence she hurries downstairs,
and quickly drops the coffee-cup and saucer used by Mademoiselle
Cynthia into a large brass vase, where it is discovered later by
Monsieur Lawrence. The remains of the cocoa she dare not touch. Too
many eyes are upon her. Guess at her relief when strychnine is
mentioned, and she discovers that after all the tragedy is not her
doing.

“We are now able to account for the symptoms of strychnine poisoning
being so long in making their appearance. A narcotic taken with
strychnine will delay the action of the poison for some hours.”

Poirot paused. Mary looked up at him, the colour slowly rising in her
face.

“All you have said is quite true, Monsieur Poirot. It was the most
awful hour of my life. I shall never forget it. But you are wonderful.
I understand now——”

“What I meant when I told you that you could safely confess to Papa
Poirot, eh? But you would not trust me.”

“I see everything now,” said Lawrence. “The drugged cocoa, taken on top
of the poisoned coffee, amply accounts for the delay.”

“Exactly. But was the coffee poisoned, or was it not? We come to a
little difficulty here, since Mrs. Inglethorp never drank it.”

“What?” The cry of surprise was universal.

“No. You will remember my speaking of a stain on the carpet in Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room? There were some peculiar points about that stain. It
was still damp, it exhaled a strong odour of coffee, and imbedded in
the nap of the carpet I found some little splinters of china. What had
happened was plain to me, for not two minutes before I had placed my
little case on the table near the window, and the table, tilting up,
had deposited it upon the floor on precisely the identical spot. In
exactly the same way, Mrs. Inglethorp had laid down her cup of coffee
on reaching her room the night before, and the treacherous table had
played her the same trick.

“What happened next is mere guess work on my part, but I should say
that Mrs. Inglethorp picked up the broken cup and placed it on the
table by the bed. Feeling in need of a stimulant of some kind, she
heated up her cocoa, and drank it off then and there. Now we are faced
with a new problem. We know the cocoa contained no strychnine. The
coffee was never drunk. Yet the strychnine must have been administered
between seven and nine o’clock that evening. What third medium was
there—a medium so suitable for disguising the taste of strychnine that
it is extraordinary no one has thought of it?” Poirot looked round the
room, and then answered himself impressively. “Her medicine!”

“Do you mean that the murderer introduced the strychnine into her
tonic?” I cried.

“There was no need to introduce it. It was already there—in the
mixture. The strychnine that killed Mrs. Inglethorp was the identical
strychnine prescribed by Dr. Wilkins. To make that clear to you, I will
read you an extract from a book on dispensing which I found in the
Dispensary of the Red Cross Hospital at Tadminster:

“‘The following prescription has become famous in text books:


          Strychninae Sulph. . . . . . 1 gr.

          Potass Bromide . . . . . . . 3vi

          Aqua ad. . . . . . . . . . . . . 3viii

          Fiat Mistura


_This solution deposits in a few hours the greater part of the
strychnine salt as an insoluble bromide in transparent crystals. A lady
in England lost her life by taking a similar mixture: the precipitated
strychnine collected at the bottom, and in taking the last dose she
swallowed nearly all of it!_

“Now there was, of course, no bromide in Dr. Wilkins’ prescription, but
you will remember that I mentioned an empty box of bromide powders. One
or two of those powders introduced into the full bottle of medicine
would effectually precipitate the strychnine, as the book describes,
and cause it to be taken in the last dose. You will learn later that
the person who usually poured out Mrs. Inglethorp’s medicine was always
extremely careful not to shake the bottle, but to leave the sediment at
the bottom of it undisturbed.

“Throughout the case, there have been evidences that the tragedy was
intended to take place on Monday evening. On that day, Mrs.
Inglethorp’s bell wire was neatly cut, and on Monday evening
Mademoiselle Cynthia was spending the night with friends, so that Mrs.
Inglethorp would have been quite alone in the right wing, completely
shut off from help of any kind, and would have died, in all
probability, before medical aid could have been summoned. But in her
hurry to be in time for the village entertainment Mrs. Inglethorp
forgot to take her medicine, and the next day she lunched away from
home, so that the last—and fatal—dose was actually taken twenty-four
hours later than had been anticipated by the murderer; and it is owing
to that delay that the final proof—the last link of the chain—is now in
my hands.”

Amid breathless excitement, he held out three thin strips of paper.

“A letter in the murderer’s own hand-writing, _mes amis!_ Had it been a
little clearer in its terms, it is possible that Mrs. Inglethorp,
warned in time, would have escaped. As it was, she realized her danger,
but not the manner of it.”

In the deathly silence, Poirot pieced together the slips of paper and,
clearing his throat, read:

Dearest Evelyn:

    ‘You will be anxious at hearing nothing. It is all right—only it
    will be to-night instead of last night. You understand. There’s a
    good time coming once the old woman is dead and out of the way. No
    one can possibly bring home the crime to me. That idea of yours
    about the bromides was a stroke of genius! But we must be very
    circumspect. A false step——’


“Here, my friends, the letter breaks off. Doubtless the writer was
interrupted; but there can be no question as to his identity. We all
know this hand-writing and——”

A howl that was almost a scream broke the silence.

“You devil! How did you get it?”

A chair was overturned. Poirot skipped nimbly aside. A quick movement
on his part, and his assailant fell with a crash.

“_Messieurs, mesdames_,” said Poirot, with a flourish, “let me
introduce you to the murderer, Mr. Alfred Inglethorp!”




CHAPTER XIII.
POIROT EXPLAINS


“Poirot, you old villain,” I said, “I’ve half a mind to strangle you!
What do you mean by deceiving me as you have done?”

We were sitting in the library. Several hectic days lay behind us. In
the room below, John and Mary were together once more, while Alfred
Inglethorp and Miss Howard were in custody. Now at last, I had Poirot
to myself, and could relieve my still burning curiosity.

Poirot did not answer me for a moment, but at last he said:

“I did not deceive you, _mon ami_. At most, I permitted you to deceive
yourself.”

“Yes, but why?”

“Well, it is difficult to explain. You see, my friend, you have a
nature so honest, and a countenance so transparent, that—_enfin_, to
conceal your feelings is impossible! If I had told you my ideas, the
very first time you saw Mr. Alfred Inglethorp that astute gentleman
would have—in your so expressive idiom—‘smelt a rat’! And then,
_bonjour_ to our chances of catching him!”

“I think that I have more diplomacy than you give me credit for.”

“My friend,” besought Poirot, “I implore you, do not enrage yourself!
Your help has been of the most invaluable. It is but the extremely
beautiful nature that you have, which made me pause.”

“Well,” I grumbled, a little mollified. “I still think you might have
given me a hint.”

“But I did, my friend. Several hints. You would not take them. Think
now, did I ever say to you that I believed John Cavendish guilty? Did I
not, on the contrary, tell you that he would almost certainly be
acquitted?”

“Yes, but——”

“And did I not immediately afterwards speak of the difficulty of
bringing the murderer to justice? Was it not plain to you that I was
speaking of two entirely different persons?”

“No,” I said, “it was not plain to me!”

“Then again,” continued Poirot, “at the beginning, did I not repeat to
you several times that I didn’t want Mr. Inglethorp arrested _now_?
That should have conveyed something to you.”

“Do you mean to say you suspected him as long ago as that?”

“Yes. To begin with, whoever else might benefit by Mrs. Inglethorp’s
death, her husband would benefit the most. There was no getting away
from that. When I went up to Styles with you that first day, I had no
idea as to how the crime had been committed, but from what I knew of
Mr. Inglethorp I fancied that it would be very hard to find anything to
connect him with it. When I arrived at the château, I realized at once
that it was Mrs. Inglethorp who had burnt the will; and there, by the
way, you cannot complain, my friend, for I tried my best to force on
you the significance of that bedroom fire in midsummer.”

“Yes, yes,” I said impatiently. “Go on.”

“Well, my friend, as I say, my views as to Mr. Inglethorp’s guilt were
very much shaken. There was, in fact, so much evidence against him that
I was inclined to believe that he had not done it.”

“When did you change your mind?”

“When I found that the more efforts I made to clear him, the more
efforts he made to get himself arrested. Then, when I discovered that
Inglethorp had nothing to do with Mrs. Raikes and that in fact it was
John Cavendish who was interested in that quarter, I was quite sure.”

“But why?”

“Simply this. If it had been Inglethorp who was carrying on an intrigue
with Mrs. Raikes, his silence was perfectly comprehensible. But, when I
discovered that it was known all over the village that it was John who
was attracted by the farmer’s pretty wife, his silence bore quite a
different interpretation. It was nonsense to pretend that he was afraid
of the scandal, as no possible scandal could attach to him. This
attitude of his gave me furiously to think, and I was slowly forced to
the conclusion that Alfred Inglethorp wanted to be arrested. _Eh bien!_
from that moment, I was equally determined that he should not be
arrested.”

“Wait a minute. I don’t see why he wished to be arrested?”

“Because, _mon ami_, it is the law of your country that a man once
acquitted can never be tried again for the same offence. Aha! but it
was clever—his idea! Assuredly, he is a man of method. See here, he
knew that in his position he was bound to be suspected, so he conceived
the exceedingly clever idea of preparing a lot of manufactured evidence
against himself. He wished to be arrested. He would then produce his
irreproachable alibi—and, hey presto, he was safe for life!”

“But I still don’t see how he managed to prove his alibi, and yet go to
the chemist’s shop?”

Poirot stared at me in surprise.

“Is it possible? My poor friend! You have not yet realized that it was
Miss Howard who went to the chemist’s shop?”

“Miss Howard?”

“But, certainly. Who else? It was most easy for her. She is of a good
height, her voice is deep and manly; moreover, remember, she and
Inglethorp are cousins, and there is a distinct resemblance between
them, especially in their gait and bearing. It was simplicity itself.
They are a clever pair!”

“I am still a little fogged as to how exactly the bromide business was
done,” I remarked.

“_Bon!_ I will reconstruct for you as far as possible. I am inclined to
think that Miss Howard was the master mind in that affair. You remember
her once mentioning that her father was a doctor? Possibly she
dispensed his medicines for him, or she may have taken the idea from
one of the many books lying about when Mademoiselle Cynthia was
studying for her exam. Anyway, she was familiar with the fact that the
addition of a bromide to a mixture containing strychnine would cause
the precipitation of the latter. Probably the idea came to her quite
suddenly. Mrs. Inglethorp had a box of bromide powders, which she
occasionally took at night. What could be easier than quietly to
dissolve one or more of those powders in Mrs. Inglethorp’s large sized
bottle of medicine when it came from Coot’s? The risk is practically
nil. The tragedy will not take place until nearly a fortnight later. If
anyone has seen either of them touching the medicine, they will have
forgotten it by that time. Miss Howard will have engineered her
quarrel, and departed from the house. The lapse of time, and her
absence, will defeat all suspicion. Yes, it was a clever idea! If they
had left it alone, it is possible the crime might never have been
brought home to them. But they were not satisfied. They tried to be too
clever—and that was their undoing.”

Poirot puffed at his tiny cigarette, his eyes fixed on the ceiling.

“They arranged a plan to throw suspicion on John Cavendish, by buying
strychnine at the village chemist’s, and signing the register in his
hand-writing.

“On Monday Mrs. Inglethorp will take the last dose of her medicine. On
Monday, therefore, at six o’clock, Alfred Inglethorp arranges to be
seen by a number of people at a spot far removed from the village. Miss
Howard has previously made up a cock and bull story about him and Mrs.
Raikes to account for his holding his tongue afterwards. At six
o’clock, Miss Howard, disguised as Alfred Inglethorp, enters the
chemist’s shop, with her story about a dog, obtains the strychnine, and
writes the name of Alfred Inglethorp in John’s handwriting, which she
had previously studied carefully.

“But, as it will never do if John, too, can prove an alibi, she writes
him an anonymous note—still copying his hand-writing—which takes him to
a remote spot where it is exceedingly unlikely that anyone will see
him.

“So far, all goes well. Miss Howard goes back to Middlingham. Alfred
Inglethorp returns to Styles. There is nothing that can compromise him
in any way, since it is Miss Howard who has the strychnine, which,
after all, is only wanted as a blind to throw suspicion on John
Cavendish.

“But now a hitch occurs. Mrs. Inglethorp does not take her medicine
that night. The broken bell, Cynthia’s absence—arranged by Inglethorp
through his wife—all these are wasted. And then—he makes his slip.

“Mrs. Inglethorp is out, and he sits down to write to his accomplice,
who, he fears, may be in a panic at the non-success of their plan. It
is probable that Mrs. Inglethorp returned earlier than he expected.
Caught in the act, and somewhat flurried he hastily shuts and locks his
desk. He fears that if he remains in the room he may have to open it
again, and that Mrs. Inglethorp might catch sight of the letter before
he could snatch it up. So he goes out and walks in the woods, little
dreaming that Mrs. Inglethorp will open his desk, and discover the
incriminating document.

“But this, as we know, is what happened. Mrs. Inglethorp reads it, and
becomes aware of the perfidy of her husband and Evelyn Howard, though,
unfortunately, the sentence about the bromides conveys no warning to
her mind. She knows that she is in danger—but is ignorant of where the
danger lies. She decides to say nothing to her husband, but sits down
and writes to her solicitor, asking him to come on the morrow, and she
also determines to destroy immediately the will which she has just
made. She keeps the fatal letter.”

“It was to discover that letter, then, that her husband forced the lock
of the despatch-case?”

“Yes, and from the enormous risk he ran we can see how fully he
realized its importance. That letter excepted, there was absolutely
nothing to connect him with the crime.”

“There’s only one thing I can’t make out, why didn’t he destroy it at
once when he got hold of it?”

“Because he did not dare take the biggest risk of all—that of keeping
it on his own person.”

“I don’t understand.”

“Look at it from his point of view. I have discovered that there were
only five short minutes in which he could have taken it—the five
minutes immediately before our own arrival on the scene, for before
that time Annie was brushing the stairs, and would have seen anyone who
passed going to the right wing. Figure to yourself the scene! He enters
the room, unlocking the door by means of one of the other doorkeys—they
were all much alike. He hurries to the despatch-case—it is locked, and
the keys are nowhere to be seen. That is a terrible blow to him, for it
means that his presence in the room cannot be concealed as he had
hoped. But he sees clearly that everything must be risked for the sake
of that damning piece of evidence. Quickly, he forces the lock with a
penknife, and turns over the papers until he finds what he is looking
for.

“But now a fresh dilemma arises: he dare not keep that piece of paper
on him. He may be seen leaving the room—he may be searched. If the
paper is found on him, it is certain doom. Probably, at this minute,
too, he hears the sounds below of Mr. Wells and John leaving the
boudoir. He must act quickly. Where can he hide this terrible slip of
paper? The contents of the waste-paper-basket are kept and in any case,
are sure to be examined. There are no means of destroying it; and he
dare not keep it. He looks round, and he sees—what do you think, _mon
ami?_”

I shook my head.

“In a moment, he has torn the letter into long thin strips, and rolling
them up into spills he thrusts them hurriedly in amongst the other
spills in the vase on the mantle-piece.”

I uttered an exclamation.

“No one would think of looking there,” Poirot continued. “And he will
be able, at his leisure, to come back and destroy this solitary piece
of evidence against him.”

“Then, all the time, it was in the spill vase in Mrs. Inglethorp’s
bedroom, under our very noses?” I cried.

Poirot nodded.

“Yes, my friend. That is where I discovered my ‘last link,’ and I owe
that very fortunate discovery to you.”

“To me?”

“Yes. Do you remember telling me that my hand shook as I was
straightening the ornaments on the mantelpiece?”

“Yes, but I don’t see——”

“No, but I saw. Do you know, my friend, I remembered that earlier in
the morning, when we had been there together, I had straightened all
the objects on the mantelpiece. And, if they were already straightened,
there would be no need to straighten them again, unless, in the
meantime, someone else had touched them.”

“Dear me,” I murmured, “so that is the explanation of your
extraordinary behaviour. You rushed down to Styles, and found it still
there?”

“Yes, and it was a race for time.”

“But I still can’t understand why Inglethorp was such a fool as to
leave it there when he had plenty of opportunity to destroy it.”

“Ah, but he had no opportunity. _I_ saw to that.”

“You?”

“Yes. Do you remember reproving me for taking the household into my
confidence on the subject?”

“Yes.”

“Well, my friend, I saw there was just one chance. I was not sure then
if Inglethorp was the criminal or not, but if he was I reasoned that he
would not have the paper on him, but would have hidden it somewhere,
and by enlisting the sympathy of the household I could effectually
prevent his destroying it. He was already under suspicion, and by
making the matter public I secured the services of about ten amateur
detectives, who would be watching him unceasingly, and being himself
aware of their watchfulness he would not dare seek further to destroy
the document. He was therefore forced to depart from the house, leaving
it in the spill vase.”

“But surely Miss Howard had ample opportunities of aiding him.”

“Yes, but Miss Howard did not know of the paper’s existence. In
accordance with their prearranged plan, she never spoke to Alfred
Inglethorp. They were supposed to be deadly enemies, and until John
Cavendish was safely convicted they neither of them dared risk a
meeting. Of course I had a watch kept on Mr. Inglethorp, hoping that
sooner or later he would lead me to the hiding-place. But he was too
clever to take any chances. The paper was safe where it was; since no
one had thought of looking there in the first week, it was not likely
they would do so afterwards. But for your lucky remark, we might never
have been able to bring him to justice.”

“I understand that now; but when did you first begin to suspect Miss
Howard?”

“When I discovered that she had told a lie at the inquest about the
letter she had received from Mrs. Inglethorp.”

“Why, what was there to lie about?”

“You saw that letter? Do you recall its general appearance?”

“Yes—more or less.”

“You will recollect, then, that Mrs. Inglethorp wrote a very
distinctive hand, and left large clear spaces between her words. But if
you look at the date at the top of the letter you will notice that
‘July 17th’ is quite different in this respect. Do you see what I
mean?”

“No,” I confessed, “I don’t.”

“You do not see that that letter was not written on the 17th, but on
the 7th—the day after Miss Howard’s departure? The ‘1’ was written in
before the ‘7’ to turn it into the ‘17th’.”

“But why?”

“That is exactly what I asked myself. Why does Miss Howard suppress the
letter written on the 17th, and produce this faked one instead? Because
she did not wish to show the letter of the 17th. Why, again? And at
once a suspicion dawned in my mind. You will remember my saying that it
was wise to beware of people who were not telling you the truth.”

“And yet,” I cried indignantly, “after that, you gave me two reasons
why Miss Howard could not have committed the crime!”

“And very good reasons too,” replied Poirot. “For a long time they were
a stumbling-block to me until I remembered a very significant fact:
that she and Alfred Inglethorp were cousins. She could not have
committed the crime single-handed, but the reasons against that did not
debar her from being an accomplice. And, then, there was that rather
over-vehement hatred of hers! It concealed a very opposite emotion.
There was, undoubtedly, a tie of passion between them long before he
came to Styles. They had already arranged their infamous plot—that he
should marry this rich, but rather foolish old lady, induce her to make
a will leaving her money to him, and then gain their ends by a very
cleverly conceived crime. If all had gone as they planned, they would
probably have left England, and lived together on their poor victim’s
money.

“They are a very astute and unscrupulous pair. While suspicion was to
be directed against him, she would be making quiet preparations for a
very different _dénouement_. She arrives from Middlingham with all the
compromising items in her possession. No suspicion attaches to her. No
notice is paid to her coming and going in the house. She hides the
strychnine and glasses in John’s room. She puts the beard in the attic.
She will see to it that sooner or later they are duly discovered.”

“I don’t quite see why they tried to fix the blame on John,” I
remarked. “It would have been much easier for them to bring the crime
home to Lawrence.”

“Yes, but that was mere chance. All the evidence against him arose out
of pure accident. It must, in fact, have been distinctly annoying to
the pair of schemers.”

“His manner was unfortunate,” I observed thoughtfully.

“Yes. You realize, of course, what was at the back of that?”

“No.”

“You did not understand that he believed Mademoiselle Cynthia guilty of
the crime?”

“No,” I exclaimed, astonished. “Impossible!”

“Not at all. I myself nearly had the same idea. It was in my mind when
I asked Mr. Wells that first question about the will. Then there were
the bromide powders which she had made up, and her clever male
impersonations, as Dorcas recounted them to us. There was really more
evidence against her than anyone else.”

“You are joking, Poirot!”

“No. Shall I tell you what made Monsieur Lawrence turn so pale when he
first entered his mother’s room on the fatal night? It was because,
whilst his mother lay there, obviously poisoned, he saw, over your
shoulder, that the door into Mademoiselle Cynthia’s room was unbolted.”

“But he declared that he saw it bolted!” I cried.

“Exactly,” said Poirot dryly. “And that was just what confirmed my
suspicion that it was not. He was shielding Mademoiselle Cynthia.”

“But why should he shield her?”

“Because he is in love with her.”

I laughed.

“There, Poirot, you are quite wrong! I happen to know for a fact that,
far from being in love with her, he positively dislikes her.”

“Who told you that, _mon ami?_”

“Cynthia herself.”

“_La pauvre petite!_ And she was concerned?”

“She said that she did not mind at all.”

“Then she certainly did mind very much,” remarked Poirot. “They are
like that—_les femmes!_”

“What you say about Lawrence is a great surprise to me,” I said.

“But why? It was most obvious. Did not Monsieur Lawrence make the sour
face every time Mademoiselle Cynthia spoke and laughed with his
brother? He had taken it into his long head that Mademoiselle Cynthia
was in love with Monsieur John. When he entered his mother’s room, and
saw her obviously poisoned, he jumped to the conclusion that
Mademoiselle Cynthia knew something about the matter. He was nearly
driven desperate. First he crushed the coffee-cup to powder under his
feet, remembering that _she_ had gone up with his mother the night
before, and he determined that there should be no chance of testing its
contents. Thenceforward, he strenuously, and quite uselessly, upheld
the theory of ‘Death from natural causes’.”

“And what about the ‘extra coffee-cup’?”

“I was fairly certain that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had hidden it, but
I had to make sure. Monsieur Lawrence did not know at all what I meant;
but, on reflection, he came to the conclusion that if he could find an
extra coffee-cup anywhere his lady love would be cleared of suspicion.
And he was perfectly right.”

“One thing more. What did Mrs. Inglethorp mean by her dying words?”

“They were, of course, an accusation against her husband.”

“Dear me, Poirot,” I said with a sigh, “I think you have explained
everything. I am glad it has all ended so happily. Even John and his
wife are reconciled.”

“Thanks to me.”

“How do you mean—thanks to you?”

“My dear friend, do you not realize that it was simply and solely the
trial which has brought them together again? That John Cavendish still
loved his wife, I was convinced. Also, that she was equally in love
with him. But they had drifted very far apart. It all arose from a
misunderstanding. She married him without love. He knew it. He is a
sensitive man in his way, he would not force himself upon her if she
did not want him. And, as he withdrew, her love awoke. But they are
both unusually proud, and their pride held them inexorably apart. He
drifted into an entanglement with Mrs. Raikes, and she deliberately
cultivated the friendship of Dr. Bauerstein. Do you remember the day of
John Cavendish’s arrest, when you found me deliberating over a big
decision?”

“Yes, I quite understood your distress.”

“Pardon me, _mon ami_, but you did not understand it in the least. I
was trying to decide whether or not I would clear John Cavendish at
once. I could have cleared him—though it might have meant a failure to
convict the real criminals. They were entirely in the dark as to my
real attitude up to the very last moment—which partly accounts for my
success.”

“Do you mean that you could have saved John Cavendish from being
brought to trial?”

“Yes, my friend. But I eventually decided in favour of ‘a woman’s
happiness’. Nothing but the great danger through which they have passed
could have brought these two proud souls together again.”

I looked at Poirot in silent amazement. The colossal cheek of the
little man! Who on earth but Poirot would have thought of a trial for
murder as a restorer of conjugal happiness!

“I perceive your thoughts, _mon ami_,” said Poirot, smiling at me. “No
one but Hercule Poirot would have attempted such a thing! And you are
wrong in condemning it. The happiness of one man and one woman is the
greatest thing in all the world.”

His words took me back to earlier events. I remembered Mary as she lay
white and exhausted on the sofa, listening, listening. There had come
the sound of the bell below. She had started up. Poirot had opened the
door, and meeting her agonized eyes had nodded gently. “Yes, madame,”
he said. “I have brought him back to you.” He had stood aside, and as I
went out I had seen the look in Mary’s eyes, as John Cavendish had
caught his wife in his arms.

“Perhaps you are right, Poirot,” I said gently. “Yes, it is the
greatest thing in the world.”

Suddenly, there was a tap at the door, and Cynthia peeped in.

“I—I only——”

“Come in,” I said, springing up.

She came in, but did not sit down.

“I—only wanted to tell you something——”

“Yes?”

Cynthia fidgeted with a little tassel for some moments, then, suddenly
exclaiming: “You dears!” kissed first me and then Poirot, and rushed
out of the room again.

“What on earth does this mean?” I asked, surprised.

It was very nice to be kissed by Cynthia, but the publicity of the
salute rather impaired the pleasure.

“It means that she has discovered Monsieur Lawrence does not dislike
her as much as she thought,” replied Poirot philosophically.

“But——”

“Here he is.”

Lawrence at that moment passed the door.

“Eh! Monsieur Lawrence,” called Poirot. “We must congratulate you, is
it not so?”

Lawrence blushed, and then smiled awkwardly. A man in love is a sorry
spectacle. Now Cynthia had looked charming.

I sighed.

“What is it, _mon ami?_”

“Nothing,” I said sadly. “They are two delightful women!”

“And neither of them is for you?” finished Poirot. “Never mind. Console
yourself, my friend. We may hunt together again, who knows? And then——”


THE END






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIOUS AFFAIR AT STYLES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The mystery of the Blue Train
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The mystery of the Blue Train

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: January 29, 2024 [eBook #72824]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Pocket Books, Inc, 1928

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF THE BLUE TRAIN ***





                     THE MYSTERY OF THE BLUE TRAIN

                          By AGATHA CHRISTIE

            Copyright, 1928, by Dodd, Mead & Company, Inc.

                         PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




                            _Dedicated to_

                       TWO DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS
                            OF THE O. F. D.

                         CARLOTTA _and_ PETER




                               Contents


                  1. The Man with the White Hair

                  2. M. le Marquis

                  3. Heart of Fire

                  4. In Curzon Street

                  5. A Useful Gentleman

                  6. Mirelle

                  7. Letters

                  8. Lady Tamplin Writes a Letter

                  9. An Offer Refused

                 10. On the Blue Train

                 11. Murder

                 12. At the Villa Marguerite

                 13. Van Aldin Gets a Telegram

                 14. Ada Mason's Story

                 15. The Comte de la Roche

                 16. Poirot Discusses the Case

                 17. An Aristocratic Gentleman

                 18. Derek Lunches

                 19. An Unexpected Visitor

                 20. Katherine Makes a Friend

                 21. At the Tennis

                 22. M. Papopolous Breakfasts

                 23. A New Theory

                 24. Poirot Gives Advice

                 25. Defiance

                 26. A Warning

                 27. Interview with Mirelle

                 28. Poirot Plays the Squirrel

                 29. A Letter From Home

                 30. Miss Viner Gives Judgment

                 31. Mr. Aarons Lunches

                 32. Katherine and Poirot Compare Notes

                 33. A New Theory

                 34. The Blue Train Again

                 35. Explanations

                 36. By the Sea




                          Cast of Characters


MONSIEUR LE MARQUIS, an elegant gentleman who merits his mask but not
his white hairs

DEMETRIUS PAPOPOLOUS, a venerable dealer in unique antiques

ZIA PAPOPOLOUS, whose resemblance to her father, Demetrius, is more
than physical

RUFUS VAN ALDIN, a hard man, with plenty of hard cash

MAJOR RICHARD KNIGHTON, Van Aldin's secretary--quick, intelligent, and
resourceful

RUTH KETTERING, another daughter who resembles her father, Rufus Van
Aldin

DEREK KETTERING, Ruth's husband, the future Lord Leconbury

MIRELLE, an exotic dancer who was not made to be poor

KATHERINE GREY, a grey-eyed saint with a sense of humor--and a
brand-new fortune

VISCOUNTESS ROSALIE TAMPLIN, who has an eye (blue and charming) for a
quick penny

THE HONORABLE LENOX TAMPLIN, who does _not_ resemble her mother

M. HERCULE POIROT, the semiretired Belgian detective who is semimodest
about admitting that he is always right

ADA MASON, lady's maid to Ruth Kettering, and English to the tip of her
red nose

COMTE ARMAND DE LA ROCHE, a plausible scoundrel with a fatal
fascination for women




                     The Mystery of the Blue Train




                    1. The Man with the White Hair


It was close on midnight when a man crossed the Place de la Concorde.
In spite of the handsome fur coat which garbed his meagre form, there
was something essentially weak and paltry about him.

A little man with a face like a rat. A man, one would say, who could
never play a conspicuous part, or rise to prominence in any sphere.
And yet, in leaping to such a conclusion, an onlooker would have been
wrong. For this man, negligible and inconspicuous as he seemed, played
a prominent part in the destiny of the world. In an Empire where rats
ruled, he was the king of the rats.

Even now, an Embassy awaited his return. But he had business to do
first--business of which the Embassy was not officially cognizant. His
face gleamed white and sharp in the moonlight. There was the least
hint of a curve in the thin nose. His father had been a Polish Jew, a
journeyman tailor. It was business such as his father would have loved
that took him abroad to-night.

He came to the Seine, crossed it, and entered one of the less reputable
quarters of Paris. Here he stopped before a tall, dilapidated house
and made his way up to an apartment on the fourth floor. He had barely
time to knock before the door was opened by a woman who had evidently
been awaiting his arrival. She gave him no greeting, but helped him
off with his overcoat and then led the way into the tawdrily furnished
sitting-room. The electric light was shaded with dirty pink festoons
and it softened, but could not disguise, the girl's face with its mask
of crude paint. Could not disguise, either, the broad Mongolian cast of
her countenance. There was no doubt of Olga Demiroff's profession, nor
of her nationality.

"All is well, little one?"

"All is well, Boris Ivanovitch."

He nodded murmuring: "I do not think I have been followed."

But there was anxiety in his tone. He went to the window, drawing the
curtains aside slightly, and peering carefully out. He started away
violently.

"There are two men--on the opposite pavement. It looks to me--" He
broke off and began gnawing at his nails--a habit he had when anxious.

The Russian girl was shaking her head with a slow, reassuring action.

"They were here before you came."

"All the same, it looks to me as though they were watching this house."

"Possibly," she admitted indifferently.

"But then--"

"What of it? Even if they _know_--it will not be _you_ they will follow
from here."

A thin, cruel smile came to his lips.

"No," he admitted, "that is true."

He mused for a minute or two and then observed:

"This damned American--he can look after himself as well as anybody."

"I suppose so."

He went again to the window.

"Tough customers," he muttered, with a chuckle. "Known to the police, I
fear. Well, well, I wish Brother Apache good hunting."

Olga Demiroff shook her head.

"If the American is the kind of man they say he is, it will take more
than a couple of cowardly apaches to get the better of him." She
paused. "I wonder--"

"Well?"

"Nothing. Only twice this evening a man has passed along this street--a
man with white hair."

"What of it?"

"This. As he passed those two men, he dropped his glove. One of them
picked it up and returned it to him. A thread-bare device."

"You mean--that the white-haired man is--their employer?"

"Something of the kind."

The Russian looked alarmed and uneasy.

"You are sure--the parcel is safe? It has not been tampered with? There
has been too much talk ... much too much talk."

He gnawed his nails again.

"Judge for yourself."

She bent to the fireplace, deftly removing the coals. Underneath, from
amongst the crumpled balls of newspaper, she selected from the very
middle an oblong package wrapped round with grimy newspaper, and handed
it to the man.

"Ingenious," he said, with a nod of approval.

"The apartment has been searched twice. The mattress on my bed was
ripped open."

"It is as I said," he muttered. "There has been too much talk. This
haggling over the price--it was a mistake."

He had unwrapped the newspaper. Inside was a small brown paper parcel.
This in turn he unwrapped, verified the contents, and quickly wrapped
it up once more. As he did so, an electric bell rang sharply.

"The American is punctual," said Olga, with a glance at the clock.

She left the room. In a minute she returned ushering in a stranger, a
big, broad-shouldered man whose transatlantic origin was evident. His
keen glance went from one to the other.

"M. Krassnine?" he inquired politely.

"I am he," said Boris. "I must apologize for--for the unconventionality
of this meeting-place. But secrecy is urgent. I--I cannot afford to be
connected with this business in any way."

"Is that so?" said the American politely.

"I have your word, have I not, that no details of this transaction will
be made public? That is one of the conditions of--sale."

The American nodded.

"That has already been agreed upon," he said indifferently. "Now,
perhaps, you will produce the goods."

"You have the money--in notes?"

"Yes," replied the other.

He did not, however, make any attempt to produce it. After a moment's
hesitation, Krassnine gestured towards the small parcel on the table.

The American took it up and unrolled the wrapping paper. The contents
he took over to a small electric lamp and submitted them to a very
thorough examination. Satisfied, he drew from his pocket a thick
leather wallet and extracted from it a wad of notes. These he handed to
the Russian, who counted them carefully.

"All right?"

"I thank you, Monsieur. Everything is correct."

"Ah!" said the other. He slipped the brown paper parcel negligently
into his pocket. He bowed to Olga. "Good evening, Mademoiselle. Good
evening, M. Krassnine."

He went out shutting the door behind him. The eyes of the two in the
room met. The man passed his tongue over his dry lips.

"I wonder--will he ever get back to his hotel?" he muttered.

By common accord, they both turned to the window. They were just in
time to see the American emerge into the street below. He turned to the
left and marched along at a good pace without once turning his head.
Two shadows stole from a doorway and followed noiselessly. Pursuers and
pursued vanished into the night. Olga Demiroff spoke.

"He will get back safely," she said. "You need not fear--or
hope--whichever it is."

"Why do you think he will be safe?" asked Krassnine curiously.

"A man who has made as much money as he has could not possibly be a
fool," said Olga. "And talking of money--"

She looked significantly at Krassnine.

"Eh?"

"My share, Boris Ivanovitch."

With some reluctance, Krassnine handed over two of the notes. She
nodded her thanks, with a complete lack of emotion, and tucked them
away in her stocking.

"That is good," she remarked, with satisfaction.

He looked at her curiously.

"You have no regrets, Olga Vassilovna?"

"Regrets? For what?"

"For what has been in your keeping. There are women--most women, I
believe, who go mad over such things."

She nodded reflectively.

"Yes, you speak truth there. Most women have that madness. I--have not.
I wonder now--" She broke off.

"Well?" asked the other curiously.

"The American will be safe with them--yes, I am sure of that. But
afterwards--"

"Eh? What are you thinking of?"

"He will give them, of course, to some woman," said Olga thoughtfully.
"I wonder what will happen then...."

She shook herself impatiently and went over to the window. Suddenly
she uttered an exclamation and called to her companion.

"See, he is going down the street now--the man I mean."

They both gazed down together. A slim, elegant figure was progressing
along at a leisurely pace. He wore an opera hat and a cloak. As he
passed a street lamp, the light illumined a thatch of thick white hair.




                           2. M. le Marquis


The man with the white hair continued on his course, unhurried, and
seemingly indifferent to his surroundings. He took a side turning to
the right and another one to the left. Now and then he hummed a little
air to himself.

Suddenly he stopped dead and listened intently. He had heard a certain
sound. It might have been the bursting of a tyre or it might have
been--a shot. A curious smile played round his lips for a minute. Then
he resumed his leisurely walk.

On turning a corner he came upon a scene of some activity. A
representative of the law was making notes in a pocket-book, and one or
two late passers-by had collected on the spot. To one of these the man
with the white hair made a polite request for information.

"Something has been happening, yes?"

"_Mais oui_, Monsieur. Two apaches set upon an elderly American
gentleman."

"They did him no injury?"

"No, indeed." The man laughed. "The American, he had a revolver in his
pocket, and before they could attack him, he fired shots so closely
round them that they took alarm and fled. The police, as usual, arrived
too late."

"Ah!" said the inquirer.

He displayed no emotion of any kind.

Placidly and unconcernedly he resumed his nocturnal strolling.
Presently he crossed the Seine and came into the richer areas of the
city. It was some twenty minutes later that he came to a stop before a
certain house in a quiet but aristocratic thoroughfare.

The shop, for shop it was, was a restrained and unpretentious one. D.
Papopolous, dealer in antiques, was so known to fame that he needed
no advertisement, and indeed most of his business was not done over
a counter. M. Papopolous had a very handsome apartment of his own
overlooking the Champs Élysées, and it might reasonably be supposed
that he would have been found there and not at his place of business
at such an hour, but the man with the white hair seemed confident of
success as he pressed the obscurely placed bell, having first given a
quick glance up and down the deserted street.

His confidence was not misplaced. The door opened and a man stood in
the aperture. He wore gold rings in his ears and was of a swarthy cast
of countenance.

"Good evening," said the stranger. "Your master is within?"

"The master is here, but he does not see chance visitors at this time
of night," growled the other.

"I think he will see me. Tell him that his friend M. le Marquis is
here."

The man opened the door a little wider and allowed the visitor to enter.

The man who gave his name as M. le Marquis had shielded his face
with his hand as he spoke. When the man-servant returned with the
information that M. Papopolous would be pleased to receive the visitor
a further change had taken place in the stranger's appearance. The
man-servant must have been very unobservant or very well trained for
he betrayed no surprise at the small black satin mask which hid the
other's features. Leading the way to a door at the end of the hall, he
opened it and announced in a respectful murmur: "_M. le Marquis_."

The figure which rose to receive this strange guest was an imposing
one. There was something venerable and patriarchal about M. Papopolous.
He had a high domed forehead and a beautiful white beard. His manner
had in it something ecclesiastical and benign.

"My dear friend," said M. Papopolous.

He spoke in French and his tones were rich and unctuous.

"I must apologize," said the visitor, "for the lateness of the hour."

"Not at all. Not at all," said M. Papopolous--"an interesting time of
night. You have had, perhaps, an interesting evening?"

"Not personally," said M. le Marquis.

"Not personally," repeated M. Papopolous, "no, no, of course not. And
there is news, eh?"

He cast a sharp glance sideways at the other, a glance that was not
ecclesiastical or benign in the least.

"There is no news. The attempt failed. I hardly expected anything else."

"Quite so," said M. Papopolous; "anything crude--"

He waved his hand to express his intense distaste for crudity in any
form. There was indeed nothing crude about M. Papopolous nor about the
goods he handled. He was well known in most European courts, and kings
called him Demetrius in a friendly manner. He had the reputation for
the most exquisite discretion. That, together with the nobility of his
aspect, had carried him through several very questionable transactions.

"The direct attack--" said M. Papopolous. He shook his head. "It
answers sometimes--but very seldom."

The other shrugged his shoulders.

"It saves time," he remarked, "and to fail costs nothing--or next to
nothing. The other plan--will not fail."

"Ah," said M. Papopolous, looking at him keenly.

The other nodded slowly.

"I have great confidence in your--er--reputation," said the antique
dealer.

M. le Marquis smiled gently.

"I think I may say," he murmured, "that your confidence will not be
misplaced."

"You have unique opportunities," said the other, with a note of envy in
his voice.

"I make them," said M. le Marquis.

He rose and took up the cloak which he had thrown carelessly on the
back of a chair.

"I will keep you informed, M. Papopolous, through the usual channels,
but there must be no hitch in your arrangements."

M. Papopolous was pained.

"There is _never_ a hitch in my arrangements," he complained.

The other smiled, and without any further word of adieu he left the
room, closing the door behind him.

M. Papopolous remained in thought for a moment stroking his venerable
white beard, and then moved across to a second door which opened
inwards. As he turned the handle, a young woman, who only too clearly
had been leaning against it with her ear to the keyhole, stumbled
headlong into the room. M. Papopolous displayed neither surprise nor
concern. It was evidently all quite natural to him.

"Well, Zia?" he asked.

"I did not hear him go," explained Zia.

She was a handsome young woman, built on Junoesque lines, with dark
flashing eyes and such a general air of resemblance to M. Papopolous
that it was easy to see they were father and daughter.

"It is annoying," she continued vexedly, "that one cannot see through a
keyhole and hear through it at the same time."

"It has often annoyed me," said M. Papopolous, with great simplicity.

"So that is M. le Marquis," said Zia slowly. "Does he always wear a
mask, father?"

"Always."

There was a pause.

"It is the rubies, I suppose?" asked Zia.

Her father nodded.

"What do you think, my little one?" he inquired, with a hint of
amusement in his beady black eyes.

"Of M. le Marquis?"

"Yes."

"I think," said Zia slowly, "that it is a very rare thing to find a
well-bred Englishman who speaks French as well as that."

"Ah," said M. Papopolous, "so that is what you think."

As usual, he did not commit himself, but he regarded Zia with benign
approval.

"I thought, too," said Zia, "that his head was an odd shape."

"Massive," said her father--"a trifle massive. But then that effect is
always created by a wig."

They both looked at each other and smiled.




                           3. Heart of Fire


Rufus Van Aldin passed through the revolving doors of the Savoy, and
walked to the reception desk. The desk clerk smiled a respectful
greeting.

"Pleased to see you back again, Mr. Van Aldin," he said.

The American millionaire nodded his head in a casual greeting.

"Everything all right?" he asked.

"Yes, sir. Major Knighton is upstairs in the suite now."

Van Aldin nodded again.

"Any mail?" he vouchsafed.

"They have all been sent up, Mr. Van Aldin. Oh! wait a minute."

He dived into a pigeon hole, and produced a letter.

"Just come this minute," he explained.

Rufus Van Aldin took the letter from him, and as he saw the
handwriting, a woman's flowing hand, his face was suddenly transformed.
The harsh contours of it softened, and the hard line of his mouth
relaxed. He looked a different man. He walked across to the lift with
the letter in his hand and the smile still on his lips.

In the drawing-room of his suite, a young man was sitting at a desk
nimbly sorting correspondence with the ease born of long practice. He
sprang up as Van Aldin entered.

"Hallo, Knighton!"

"Glad to see you back, sir. Had a good time?"

"So-so!" said the millionaire unemotionally. "Paris is rather a
one-horse city nowadays. Still--I got what I went over for."

He smiled to himself rather grimly.

"You usually do, I believe," said the secretary, laughing.

"That's so," agreed the other.

He spoke in a matter-of-fact manner, as one stating a well-known fact.
Throwing off his heavy overcoat, he advanced to the desk.

"Anything urgent?"

"I don't think so, sir. Mostly the usual stuff. I have not quite
finished sorting it out."

Van Aldin nodded briefly. He was a man who seldom expressed either
blame or praise. His methods with those he employed were simple;
he gave them a fair trial and dismissed promptly those who were
inefficient. His selections of people were unconventional. Knighton,
for instance, he had met casually at a Swiss resort two months
previously. He had approved of the fellow, looked up his war record,
and found in it the explanation of the limp with which he walked.
Knighton had made no secret of the fact that he was looking for a
job, and indeed diffidently asked the millionaire if he knew of any
available post. Van Aldin remembered, with a grim smile of amusement,
the young man's complete astonishment when he had been offered the post
of secretary to the great man himself.

"But--but I have no experience of business," he had stammered.

"That doesn't matter a cuss," Van Aldin had replied. "I have got three
secretaries already to attend to that kind of thing. But I am likely
to be in England for the next six months, and I want an Englishman
who--well, knows the ropes--and can attend to the social side of things
for me."

So far, Van Aldin had found his judgment confirmed. Knighton had proved
quick, intelligent, and resourceful, and he had a distinct charm of
manner.

The secretary indicated three or four letters placed by themselves on
the top of the desk.

"It might perhaps be as well, sir, if you glanced at these," he
suggested. "The top one is about the Colton agreement--"

But Rufus Van Aldin held up a protesting hand.

"I am not going to look at a durned thing to-night," he declared. "They
can all wait till the morning. Except this one," he added, looking down
at the letter he held in his hand. And again that strange transforming
smile stole over his face.

Richard Knighton smiled sympathetically.

"Mrs. Kettering?" he murmured. "She rang up yesterday and to-day. She
seems very anxious to see you at once, sir."

"Does she, now!"

The smile faded from the millionaire's face. He ripped open the
envelope which he held in his hand and took out the enclosed sheet. As
he read it his face darkened, his mouth set grimly in the line which
Wall Street knew so well, and his brows knit themselves ominously.
Knighton turned tactfully away, and went on opening letters and sorting
them. A muttered oath escaped the millionaire, and his clenched fist
hit the table sharply.

"I'll not stand for this," he muttered to himself. "Poor little girl,
it's a good thing she has her old father behind her."

He walked up and down the room for some minutes, his brows drawn
together in a scowl. Knighton still bent assiduously over the desk.
Suddenly Van Aldin came to an abrupt halt. He took up his overcoat from
the chair where he had thrown it.

"Are you going out again, sir?"

"Yes; I'm going round to see my daughter."

"If Colton's people ring up--"

"Tell them to go to the devil," said Van Aldin.

"Very well," said the secretary unemotionally.

Van Aldin had his overcoat on by now. Cramming his hat upon his head,
he went towards the door. He paused with his hand upon the handle.

"You are a good fellow, Knighton," he said. "You don't worry me when I
am rattled."

Knighton smiled a little, but made no reply.

"Ruth is my only child," said Van Aldin, "and there is no one on this
earth who knows quite what she means to me."

A faint smile irradiated his face. He slipped his hand into his pocket.

"Care to see something, Knighton?"

He came back towards the secretary.

From his pocket he drew out a parcel carelessly wrapped in brown paper.
He tossed off the wrapping and disclosed a big, shabby, red velvet
case. In the centre of it were some twisted initials surmounted by a
crown. He snapped the case open, and the secretary drew in his breath
sharply. Against the slightly dingy white of the interior, the stones
glowed like blood.

"My God! sir," said Knighton. "Are they--are they real?"

Van Aldin laughed a quiet little cackle of amusement.

"I don't wonder at your asking that. Amongst these rubies are the three
largest in the world. Catherine of Russia wore them, Knighton. That
centre one there is known as Heart of Fire. It's perfect--not a flaw in
it."

"But," the secretary murmured, "they must be worth a fortune."

"Four or five hundred thousand dollars," said Van Aldin nonchalantly,
"and that is apart from the historical interest."

"And you carry them about--like that, loose in your pocket?"

Van Aldin laughed amusedly.

"I guess so. You see, they are my little present for Ruthie."

The secretary smiled discreetly.

"I can understand now Mrs. Kettering's anxiety over the telephone," he
murmured.

But Van Aldin shook his head. The hard look returned to his face.

"You are wrong there," he said. "She doesn't know about these; they are
my little surprise for her."

He shut the case, and began slowly to wrap it up again.

"It's a hard thing, Knighton," he said, "how little one can do for
those one loves. I can buy a good portion of the earth for Ruth, if it
would be any use to her, but it isn't. I can hang these things round
her neck and give her a moment or two's pleasure, maybe, but--"

He shook his head.

"When a woman is not happy in her home--"

He left the sentence unfinished. The secretary nodded discreetly. He
knew, none better, the reputation of the Hon. Derek Kettering. Van
Aldin sighed. Slipping the parcel back in his coat pocket, he nodded to
Knighton and left the room.




                          4. In Curzon Street


The Hon. Mrs. Derek Kettering lived in Curzon Street. The butler who
opened the door recognized Rufus Van Aldin at once and permitted
himself a discreet smile of greeting. He led the way upstairs to the
big double drawing-room on the first floor.

A woman who was sitting by the window started up with a cry.

"Why, Dad, if that isn't too good for anything! I've been telephoning
Major Knighton all day to try and get hold of you, but he couldn't say
for sure when you were expected back."

Ruth Kettering was twenty-eight years of age. Without being beautiful,
or in the real sense of the word even pretty, she was striking looking
because of her colouring. Van Aldin had been called Carrots and Ginger
in his time, and Ruth's hair was almost pure auburn. With it went dark
eyes and very black lashes--the effect somewhat enhanced by art. She
was tall and slender, and moved well. At a careless glance it was the
face of a Raphael Madonna. Only if one looked closely did one perceive
the same line of jaw and chin as in Van Aldin's face, bespeaking the
same hardness and determination. It suited the man, but suited the
woman less well. From her childhood upward Ruth Van Aldin had been
accustomed to having her own way, and any one who had ever stood up
against her soon realized that Rufus Van Aldin's daughter never gave in.

"Knighton told me you'd 'phoned him," said Van Aldin. "I only got back
from Paris half an hour ago. What's all this about Derek?"

Ruth Kettering flushed angrily.

"It's unspeakable. It's beyond all limits," she cried. "He--he doesn't
seem to listen to anything I say."

There was bewilderment as well as anger in her voice.

"He'll listen to me," said the millionaire grimly.

Ruth went on.

"I've hardly seen him for the last month. He goes about everywhere with
that woman."

"With what woman?"

"Mirelle. She dances at the Parthenon, you know."

Van Aldin nodded.

"I was down at Leconbury last week. I--I spoke to Lord Leconbury. He
was awfully sweet to me, sympathized entirely. He said he'd give Derek
a good talking to."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin.

"What do you mean by 'Ah!', Dad?"

"Just what you think I mean, Ruthie. Poor old Leconbury is a wash-out.
Of course he sympathized with you, of course he tried to soothe you
down. Having got his son and heir married to the daughter of one of the
richest men in the States, he naturally doesn't want to mess the thing
up. But he's got one foot in the grave already, every one knows that,
and anything he may say will cut darned little ice with Derek."

"Can't _you_ do anything, Dad?" urged Ruth, after a minute or two.

"I might," said the millionaire. He waited a second reflectively, and
then went on. "There are several things I might do, but there's only
one that will be any real good. How much pluck have you got, Ruthie?"

She stared at him. He nodded back at her.

"I mean just what I say. Have you got the grit to admit to all the
world that you've made a mistake? There's only one way out of this
mess, Ruthie. Cut your losses and start afresh."

"You mean--"

"Divorce."

"Divorce!"

Van Aldin smiled drily.

"You say that word, Ruth, as though you'd never heard it before. And
yet your friends are doing it all round you every day."

"Oh! I know that. But--"

She stopped, biting her lip. Her father nodded comprehendingly.

"I know, Ruth. You're like me, you can't bear to let go. But I've
learnt, and you've got to learn, that there are times when it's the
only way. I might find ways of whistling Derek back to you, but it
would all come to the same in the end. _He's no good_, Ruth; he's
rotten through and through. And mind you, I blame myself for ever
letting you marry him. But you were kind of set on having him, and he
seemed in earnest about turning over a new leaf--and well, I'd crossed
you once, honey...."

He did not look at her as he said the last words. Had he done so, he
might have seen the swift colour that came up in her face.

"You did," she said in a hard voice.

"I was too darned softhearted to do it a second time. I can't tell you
how I wish I had, though. You've led a poor kind of life for the last
few years, Ruth."

"It has not been very--agreeable," agreed Mrs. Kettering.

"That's why I say to you that this thing has got to _stop_!" He brought
his hand down with a bang on the table. "You may have a hankering after
the fellow still. _Cut it out._ Face facts. Derek Kettering married you
for your money. That's all there is to it. Get rid of him, Ruth."

Ruth Kettering looked down at the ground for some moments, then she
said, without raising her head:

"Supposing he doesn't consent?"

Van Aldin looked at her in astonishment.

"He won't have a say in the matter."

She flushed and bit her lip.

"No--no--of course not. I only meant--"

She stopped. Her father eyed her keenly.

"What did you mean?"

"I meant--" She paused, choosing her words carefully. "He mayn't take
it lying down."

The millionaire's chin shot out grimly.

"You mean he'll fight the case? Let him! But, as a matter of fact,
you're wrong. He won't fight. Any solicitor he consults will tell him
he hasn't a leg to stand upon."

"You don't think"--she hesitated--"I mean--out of sheer spite against
me--he might, try to make it awkward?"

Her father looked at her in some astonishment.

"Fight the case, you mean?"

He shook his head.

"Very unlikely. You see, he would have to have something to go upon."

Mrs. Kettering did not answer. Van Aldin looked at her sharply.

"Come, Ruth, out with it. There's something troubling you--what is it?"

"Nothing, nothing at all."

But her voice was unconvincing.

"You are dreading the publicity, eh? Is that it? You leave it to me.
I'll put the whole thing through so smoothly that there will be no fuss
at all."

"Very well, Dad, if you really think it's the best thing to be done."

"Got a fancy for the fellow still, Ruth? Is that it?"

"No."

The word came with no uncertain emphasis. Van Aldin seemed satisfied.
He patted his daughter on the shoulder.

"It will be all right, little girl. Don't you worry any. Now let's
forget all about this. I have brought you a present from Paris."

"For me? Something very nice?"

"I hope you'll think so," said Van Aldin, smiling.

He took the parcel from his coat pocket and handed it to her. She
unwrapped it eagerly, and snapped open the case. A long-drawn "Oh!"
came from her lips. Ruth Kettering loved jewels--always had done so.

"Dad, how--how wonderful!"

"Rather in a class by themselves, aren't they?" said the millionaire,
with satisfaction. "You like them, eh?"

"Like them? Dad, they're unique. How did you get hold of them?"

Van Aldin smiled.

"Ah! that's my secret. They had to be bought privately, of course. They
are rather well known. See that big stone in the middle? You have heard
of it, maybe; that's the historic 'Heart of Fire.'"

"Heart of Fire!" repeated Mrs. Kettering.

She had taken the stones from the case and was holding them against
her breast. The millionaire watched her. He was thinking of the series
of women who had worn the jewels. The heartaches, the despairs, the
jealousies. "Heart of Fire," like all famous stones, had left behind
it a trail of tragedy and violence. Held in Ruth Kettering's assured
hand, it seemed to lose its potency of evil. With her cool, equable
poise, this woman of the western world seemed a negation to tragedy or
heart-burnings. Ruth returned the stones to their case; then, jumping
up, she flung her arms round her father's neck.

"Thank you, thank you, thank you, Dad! They are wonderful! You do give
me the most marvellous presents always."

"That's all right," said Van Aldin, patting her shoulder. "You are all
I have, you know, Ruthie."

"You will stay to dinner, won't you, father?"

"I don't think so. You were going out, weren't you?"

"Yes, but I can easily put that off. Nothing very exciting."

"No," said Van Aldin. "Keep your engagement. I have got a good deal to
attend to. See you to-morrow, my dear. Perhaps if I 'phone you, we can
meet at Galbraiths'?"

Messrs. Galbraith, Galbraith, Cuthbertson, & Galbraith were Van Aldin's
London solicitors.

"Very well, Dad." She hesitated. "I suppose it--this--won't keep me
from going to the Riviera?"

"When are you off?"

"On the fourteenth."

"Oh, that will be all right. These things take a long time to mature.
By the way, Ruth, I shouldn't take those rubies abroad if I were you.
Leave them at the bank."

Mrs. Kettering nodded.

"We don't want to have you robbed and murdered for the sake of 'Heart
of Fire,'" said the millionaire jocosely.

"And yet you carried it about in your pocket loose," retorted his
daughter, smiling.

"Yes--"

Something, some hesitation, caught her attention.

"What is it, Dad?"

"Nothing." He smiled. "Thinking of a little adventure of mine in Paris."

"An adventure?"

"Yes, the night I bought these things."

He made a gesture towards the jewel case.

"Oh, do tell me."

"Nothing to tell, Ruthie. Some apache fellows got a bit fresh and I
shot at them and they got off. That's all."

She looked at him with some pride.

"You're a tough proposition, Dad."

"You bet I am, Ruthie."

He kissed her affectionately and departed. On arriving back at the
Savoy, he gave a curt order to Knighton.

"Get hold of a man called Goby; you'll find his address in my private
book. He's to be here to-morrow morning at half-past nine."

"Yes, sir."

"I also want to see Mr. Kettering. Run him to earth for me if you can.
Try his Club--at any rate, get hold of him somehow, and arrange for me
to see him here to-morrow morning. Better make it latish, about twelve.
His sort aren't early risers."

The secretary nodded in comprehension of these instructions. Van Aldin
gave himself into the hands of his valet. His bath was prepared, and
as he lay luxuriating in the hot water, his mind went back over the
conversation with his daughter. On the whole he was well satisfied. His
keen mind had long since accepted the fact that divorce was the only
possible way out. Ruth had agreed to the proposed solution with more
readiness than he had hoped for. Yet, in spite of her acquiescence, he
was left with a vague sense of uneasiness. Something about her manner,
he felt, had not been quite natural. He frowned to himself.

"Maybe I'm fanciful," he muttered, "and yet--I bet there's something
she has not told me."




                         5. A Useful Gentleman


Rufus Van Aldin had just finished the sparse breakfast of coffee and
dry toast, which was all he ever allowed himself, when Knighton entered
the room.

"Mr. Goby is below, sir, waiting to see you."

The millionaire glanced at the clock. It was just half-past nine.

"All right," he said curtly. "He can come up."

A minute or two later, Mr. Goby entered the room. He was a small,
elderly man, shabbily dressed, with eyes that looked carefully all
round the room, and never at the person he was addressing.

"Good morning, Goby," said the millionaire. "Take a chair."

"Thank you, Mr. Van Aldin."

Mr. Goby sat down with his hands on his knees, and gazed earnestly at
the radiator.

"I have got a job for you."

"Yes, Mr. Van Aldin?"

"My daughter is married to the Hon. Derek Kettering, as you may perhaps
know."

Mr. Goby transferred his gaze from the radiator to the left-hand drawer
of the desk, and permitted a deprecating smile to pass over his face.
Mr. Goby knew a great many things, but he always hated to admit the
fact.

"By my advice, she is about to file a petition for divorce. That, of
course, is a solicitor's business. But, for private reasons, I want the
fullest and most complete information."

Mr. Goby looked at the cornice and murmured:

"About Mr. Kettering?"

"About Mr. Kettering."

"Very good, sir."

Mr. Goby rose to his feet.

"When will you have it ready for me?"

"Are you in a hurry, sir?"

"I'm always in a hurry," said the millionaire.

Mr. Goby smiled understandingly at the fender.

"Shall we say two o'clock this afternoon, sir?" he asked.

"Excellent," approved the other. "Good morning, Goby."

"Good morning, Mr. Van Aldin."

"That's a very useful man," said the millionaire as Goby went out and
his secretary came in. "In his own line he's a specialist."

"What is his line?"

"Information. Give him twenty-four hours and he would lay the private
life of the Archbishop of Canterbury bare for you."

"A useful sort of chap," said Knighton, with a smile.

"He has been useful to me once or twice," said Van Aldin. "Now then,
Knighton, I'm ready for work."

The next few hours saw a vast quantity of business rapidly transacted.
It was half-past twelve when the telephone bell rang, and Mr. Van Aldin
was informed that Mr. Kettering had called. Knighton looked at Van
Aldin, and interpreted his brief nod.

"Ask Mr. Kettering to come up, please."

The secretary gathered up his papers and departed. He and the visitor
passed each other in the doorway, and Derek Kettering stood aside to
let the other go out. Then he came in, shutting the door behind him.

"Good morning, sir. You are very anxious to see me, I hear."

The lazy voice with its slightly ironic inflection roused memories in
Van Aldin. There was charm in it--there had always been charm in it. He
looked piercingly at his son-in-law. Derek Kettering was thirty-four,
lean of build, with a dark, narrow face, which had even now something
indescribably boyish in it.

"Come in," said Van Aldin curtly. "Sit down."

Kettering flung himself lightly into an arm-chair. He looked at his
father-in-law with a kind of tolerant amusement.

"Not seen you for a long time, sir," he remarked pleasantly. "About two
years, I should say. Seen Ruth yet?"

"I saw her last night," said Van Aldin.

"Looking very fit, isn't she?" said the other lightly.

"I didn't know you had had much opportunity of judging," said Van Aldin
drily.

Derek Kettering raised his eyebrows.

"Oh, we sometimes meet at the same night club, you know," he said
airily.

"I am not going to beat about the bush," Van Aldin said curtly. "I have
advised Ruth to file a petition for divorce."

Derek Kettering seemed unmoved.

"How drastic!" he murmured. "Do you mind if I smoke, sir?"

He lit a cigarette, and puffed out a cloud of smoke as he added
nonchalantly:

"And what did Ruth say?"

"Ruth proposes to take my advice," said her father.

"Does she really?"

"Is that all you have got to say?" demanded Van Aldin sharply.

Kettering flicked his ash into the grate.

"I think, you know," he said, with a detached air, "that she's making a
great mistake."

"From your point of view she doubtless is," said Van Aldin grimly.

"Oh, come now," said the other; "don't let's be personal. I really
wasn't thinking of myself at the moment. I was thinking of Ruth. You
know my poor old Governor really can't last much longer; all the
doctors say so. Ruth had better give it a couple more years, then I
shall be Lord Leconbury, and she can be châtelaine of Leconbury, which
is what she married me for."

"I won't have any of your darned impudence," roared Van Aldin.

Derek Kettering smiled at him quite unmoved.

"I agree with you. It's an obsolete idea," he said. "There's nothing
in a title nowadays. Still, Leconbury is a very fine old place, and,
after all, we are one of the oldest families in England. It will be
very annoying for Ruth if she divorces me to find me marrying again,
and some other woman queening it at Leconbury instead of her."

"I am serious, young man," said Van Aldin.

"Oh, so am I," said Kettering. "I am in very low water financially; it
will put me in a nasty hole if Ruth divorces me, and, after all, if she
has stood it for ten years, why not stand it a little longer? I give
you my word of honour that the old man can't possibly last out another
eighteen months, and, as I said before, it's a pity Ruth shouldn't get
what she married me for."

"You suggest that my daughter married you for your title and position?"

Derek Kettering laughed a laugh that was not all amusement.

"You don't think it was a question of a love match?" he asked.

"I know," said Van Aldin slowly, "that you spoke very differently in
Paris ten years ago."

"Did I? Perhaps I did. Ruth was very beautiful, you know--rather like
an angel or a saint, or something that had stepped down from a niche
in a church. I had fine ideas, I remember, of turning over a new leaf,
of settling down and living up to the highest traditions of English
home-life with a beautiful wife who loved me."

He laughed again, rather more discordantly.

"But you don't believe that, I suppose?" he said.

"I have no doubt at all that you married Ruth for her money," said Van
Aldin unemotionally.

"And that she married me for love?" asked the other ironically.

"Certainly," said Van Aldin.

Derek Kettering stared at him for a minute or two, then he nodded
reflectively.

"I see you believe that," he said. "So did I at the time. I can assure
you, my dear father-in-law, I was very soon undeceived."

"I don't know what you are getting at," said Van Aldin, "and I don't
care. You have treated Ruth darned badly."

"Oh, I have," agreed Kettering lightly, "but she's tough, you know.
She's your daughter. Underneath the pink-and-white softness of her
she's as hard as granite. You have always been known as a hard man, so
I have been told, but Ruth is harder than you are. You, at any rate,
love one person better than yourself. Ruth never has and never will."

"That is enough," said Van Aldin. "I asked you here so that I could
tell you fair and square what I meant to do. My girl has got to have
some happiness, and remember this, I am behind her."

Derek Kettering got up and stood by the mantelpiece. He tossed away his
cigarette. When he spoke, his voice was very quiet.

"What exactly do you mean by that, I wonder?" he said.

"I mean," said Van Aldin, "that you had better not try to defend the
case."

"Oh," said Kettering. "Is that a threat?"

"You can take it any way you please," said Van Aldin.

Kettering drew a chair up to the table. He sat down fronting the
millionaire.

"And supposing," he said softly, "that, just for argument's sake, I did
defend the case?"

Van Aldin shrugged his shoulders.

"You have not got a leg to stand upon, you young fool. Ask your
solicitors, they will soon tell you. Your conduct has been notorious,
the talk of London."

"Ruth has been kicking up a row about Mirelle, I suppose. Very foolish
of her. I don't interfere with her friends."

"What do you mean?" said Van Aldin sharply.

Derek Kettering laughed.

"I see you don't know everything sir," he said. "You are, perhaps
naturally, prejudiced."

He took up his hat and stick and moved towards the door.

"Giving advice is not much in my line." He delivered his final thrust.
"But, in this case, I should advise most strongly perfect frankness
between father and daughter."

He passed quickly out of the room and shut the door behind him just as
the millionaire sprang up.

"Now, what the hell did he mean by that?" said Van Aldin as he sank
back into his chair again.

All his uneasiness returned in full force. There was something here
that he had not yet got to the bottom of. The telephone was by his
elbow; he seized it, and asked for the number of his daughter's house.

"Hallo! Hallo! Is that Mayfair 81907? Mrs. Kettering in? Oh, she's
out, is she? Yes, out to lunch. What time will she be in? You don't
know? Oh, very good; no, there's no message."

He slammed the receiver down again angrily. At two o'clock he was
pacing the floor of his room waiting expectantly for Goby. The latter
was ushered in at ten minutes past two.

"Well?" barked the millionaire sharply.

But little Mr. Goby was not to be hurried. He sat down at the table,
produced a very shabby pocket-book, and proceeded to read from it
in a monotonous voice. The millionaire listened attentively, with
an increasing satisfaction. Goby came to a full stop, and looked
attentively at the wastepaper-basket.

"Um!" said Van Aldin. "That seems pretty definite. The case will go
through like winking. The hotel evidence is all right, I suppose?"

"Cast iron," said Mr. Goby, and looked malevolently at a gilt arm-chair.

"And financially he's in very low water. He's trying to raise a
loan now, you say? Has already raised practically all he can upon
his expectations from his father. Once the news of the divorce gets
about, he won't be able to raise another cent, and not only that, his
obligations can be bought up and pressure can be put upon him from that
quarter. We have got him, Goby; we have got him in a cleft stick."

He hit the table a bang with his fist. His face was grim and triumphant.

"The information," said Mr. Goby in a thin voice, "seems satisfactory."

"I have got to go round to Curzon Street now," said the millionaire. "I
am much obliged to you, Goby. You are the goods all right."

A pale smile of gratification showed itself on the little man's face.

"Thank you, Mr. Van Aldin," he said; "I try to do my best."

Van Aldin did not go direct to Curzon Street. He went first to the
City, where he had two interviews which added to his satisfaction. From
there he took the tube to Down Street. As he was walking along Curzon
Street, a figure came out of No. 160, and turned up the street towards
him, so that they passed each other on the pavement. For a moment,
the millionaire had fancied it might be Derek Kettering himself; the
height and build were not unlike. But as they came face to face, he saw
that the man was a stranger to him. At least--no, not a stranger; his
face awoke some call of recognition in the millionaire's mind, and it
was associated definitely with something unpleasant. He cudgelled his
brains in vain, but the thing eluded him. He went on, shaking his head
irritably. He hated to be baffled.

Ruth Kettering was clearly expecting him. She ran to him and kissed him
when he entered.

"Well, Dad, how are things going?"

"Very well," said Van Aldin; "but I have got a word or two to say to
you, Ruth."

Almost insensibly he felt the change in her; something shrewd and
watchful replaced the impulsiveness of her greeting. She sat down in a
big arm-chair.

"Well, Dad?" she asked. "What is it?"

"I saw your husband this morning," said Van Aldin.

"You saw Derek?"

"I did. He said a lot of things, most of which were darned cheek. Just
as he was leaving, he said something that I didn't understand. He
advised me to be sure that there was perfect frankness between father
and daughter. What did he mean by that, Ruthie?"

Mrs. Kettering moved a little in her chair.

"I--I don't know, Dad. How should I?"

"Of course you know," said Van Aldin. "He said something else, about
his having his friends and not interfering with yours. What did he mean
by that?"

"I don't know," said Ruth Kettering again.

Van Aldin sat down. His mouth set itself in a grim line.

"See here, Ruth. I am not going into this with my eyes closed. I am not
at all sure that that husband of yours doesn't mean to make trouble.
Now, he can't do it, I am sure of that. I have got the means to silence
him, to shut his mouth for good and all, but I have got to know if
there's any need to use those means. What did he mean by your having
your own friends?"

Mrs. Kettering shrugged her shoulders.

"I have got lots of friends," she said uncertainly. "I don't know what
he meant, I am sure."

"You do," said Van Aldin.

He was speaking now as he might have spoken to a business adversary.

"I will put it plainer. Who is the man?"

"What man?"

"_The_ man. That's what Derek was driving at. Some special man who is
a friend of yours. You needn't worry, honey, I know there is nothing
in it, but we have got to look at everything as it might appear to the
Court. They can twist these things about a good deal, you know. I want
to know who the man is, and just how friendly you have been with him."

Ruth didn't answer. Her hands were kneading themselves together in
intense nervous absorption.

"Come, honey," said Van Aldin in a softer voice. "Don't be afraid of
your old Dad. I was not too harsh, was I, even that time in Paris?--By
gosh!"

He stopped, thunderstruck.

"That's who it was," he murmured to himself. "I thought I knew his
face."

"What are you talking about, Dad? I don't understand."

The millionaire strode across to her and took her firmly by the wrist.

"See here, Ruth, have you been seeing that fellow again?"

"What fellow?"

"The one we had all that fuss about years ago. You know who I mean well
enough."

"You mean"--she hesitated--"you mean the Comte de la Roche?"

"Comte de la Roche!" snorted Van Aldin. "I told you at the time that
the man was no better than a swindler. You had entangled yourself with
him then very deeply, but I got you out of his clutches."

"Yes, you did," said Ruth bitterly. "And I married Derek Kettering."

"You wanted to," said the millionaire sharply.

She shrugged her shoulders.

"And now," said Van Aldin slowly, "you have been seeing him
again--after all I told you. He has been in the house to-day. I met him
outside, and couldn't place him for the moment."

Ruth Kettering had recovered her composure.

"I want to tell you one thing, Dad; you are wrong about Armand--the
Comte de la Roche, I mean. Oh, I know there were several regrettable
incidents in his youth--he has told me about them; but--well, he has
cared for me always. It broke his heart when you parted us in Paris,
and now--"

She was interrupted by the snort of indignation her father gave.

"So you fell for that stuff, did you? You, a daughter of mine! My God!"

He threw up his hands.

"That women can be such darned fools!"




                              6. Mirelle


Derek Kettering emerged from Van Aldin's suite so precipitantly that he
collided with a lady passing across the corridor. He apologized, and
she accepted his apologies with a smiling reassurance and passed on,
leaving with him a pleasant impression of a soothing personality and
rather fine grey eyes.

For all his nonchalance, his interview with his father-in-law had
shaken him more than he cared to show. He had a solitary lunch, and
after it, frowning to himself a little, he went around to the sumptuous
flat that housed the lady known as Mirelle. A trim Frenchwoman received
him with smiles.

"But enter then, Monsieur. Madame reposes herself."

He was ushered into the long room with its Eastern setting which
he knew so well. Mirelle was lying on the divan, supported by an
incredible number of cushions, all in varying shades of amber, to
harmonize with the yellow ochre of her complexion. The dancer was a
beautifully made woman, and if her face, beneath its mask of yellow,
was in truth somewhat haggard, it had a bizarre charm of its own, and
her orange lips smiled invitingly at Derek Kettering.

He kissed her, and flung himself into a chair.

"What have you been doing with yourself? Just got up, I suppose?"

The orange mouth widened into a long smile.

"No," said the dancer. "I have been at work."

She flung out a long, pale hand towards the piano, which was littered
with untidy music scores.

"Ambrose has been here. He has been playing me the new Opera."

Kettering nodded without paying much attention. He was profoundly
uninterested in Claud Ambrose and the latter's operatic setting of
Ibsen's _Peer Gynt_. So was Mirelle, for that matter, regarding it
merely as a unique opportunity for her own presentation as Anitra.

"It is a marvellous dance," she murmured. "I shall put all the passion
of the desert into it. I shall dance hung over with jewels--ah! and,
by the way, _mon ami_, there is a pearl that I saw yesterday in Bond
Street--a black pearl."

She paused, looking at him invitingly.

"My dear girl," said Kettering, "it's no use talking of black pearls to
me. At the present minute, as far as I am concerned, the fat is in the
fire."

She was quick to respond to his tone. She sat up, her big black eyes
widening.

"What is that you say, Dereek? What has happened?"

"My esteemed father-in-law," said Kettering, "is preparing to go off
the deep-end."

"Eh?"

"In other words, he wants Ruth to divorce me."

"How stupid!" said Mirelle. "Why should she want to divorce you?"

Derek Kettering grinned.

"Mainly because of you, _chérie_!" he said.

Mirelle shrugged her shoulders.

"That is foolish," she observed in a matter-of-fact voice.

"Very foolish," agreed Derek.

"What are you going to do about it?" demanded Mirelle.

"My dear girl, what can I do? On the one side, the man with unlimited
money; on the other side, the man with unlimited debts. There is no
question as to who will come out on top."

"They are extraordinary, these Americans," commented Mirelle. "It is
not as though your wife were fond of you."

"Well," said Derek, "what are we going to do about it?"

She looked at him inquiringly. He came over and took both her hands in
his.

"Are you going to stick to me?"

"What do you mean? After--"

"Yes," said Kettering. "After, when the creditors come down like wolves
on the fold. I am damned fond of you, Mirelle; are you going to let me
down?"

She pulled her hands away from him.

"You know I adore you, Dereek."

He caught the note of evasion in her voice.

"So that's that, is it? The rats will leave the sinking ship."

"Ah, Dereek!"

"Out with it," he said violently. "You will fling me over; is that it?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"I am fond of you, _mon ami_--indeed I am fond of you. You are very
charming--_un beau garçon_, but _ce n'est pas pratique_."

"You are a rich man's luxury, eh? Is that it?"

"If you like to put it that way."

She leaned back on the cushions, her head flung back.

"All the same, I am fond of you, Dereek."

He went over to the window and stood there some time looking out, with
his back to her. Presently the dancer raised herself on her elbow and
stared at him curiously.

"What are you thinking of, _mon ami_?"

He grinned at her over his shoulder, a curious grin, that made her
vaguely uneasy.

"As it happened, I was thinking of a woman, my dear."

"A woman, eh?"

Mirelle pounced on something that she could understand.

"You are thinking of some other woman, is that it?"

"Oh, you needn't worry; it is purely a fancy portrait. 'Portrait of a
lady with grey eyes.'"

Mirelle said sharply, "When did you meet her?"

Derek Kettering laughed, and his laughter had a mocking, ironical sound.

"I ran into the lady in the corridor of the Savoy Hotel."

"Well! What did she say?"

"As far as I can remember, I said, 'I beg your pardon,' and she said,
'It doesn't matter,' or words to that effect."

"And then?" persisted the dancer.

Kettering shrugged his shoulders.

"And then--nothing. That was the end of the incident."

"I don't understand a word of what you are talking about," declared the
dancer.

"Portrait of a lady with grey eyes," murmured Derek reflectively. "Just
as well I am never likely to meet her again."

"Why?"

"She might bring me bad luck. Women do."

Mirelle slipped quickly from her couch, and came across to him, laying
one long, snake-like arm round his neck.

"You are foolish, Dereek," she murmured. "You are very foolish. You
are _beau garçon_, and I adore you, but I am not made to be poor--no,
decidedly I am not made to be poor. Now listen to me; everything is
very simple. You must make it up with your wife."

"I am afraid that's not going to be actually in the sphere of practical
politics," said Derek drily.

"How do you say? I do not understand."

"Van Aldin, my dear, is not taking any. He is the kind of man who makes
up his mind and sticks to it."

"I have heard of him," nodded the dancer. "He is very rich, is he not?
Almost the richest man in America. A few days ago, in Paris, he bought
the most wonderful ruby in the world--'Heart of Fire' it is called."

Kettering did not answer. The dancer went on musingly:

"It is a wonderful stone--a stone that should belong to a woman like
me. I love jewels, Dereek; they say something to me. Ah! to wear a ruby
like 'Heart of Fire.'"

She gave a little sigh, and then became practical once more.

"You don't understand these things, Dereek; you are only a man. Van
Aldin will give these rubies to his daughter, I suppose. Is she his
only child?"

"Yes."

"Then when he dies, she will inherit all his money. She will be a rich
woman."

"She is a rich woman already," said Kettering drily. "He settled a
couple of millions on her at her marriage."

"A couple of millions! But that is immense. And if she died suddenly,
eh? That would all come to you?"

"As things stand at present," said Kettering slowly, "it would. As far
as I know she has not made a will."

"_Mon Dieu!_" said the dancer. "If she were to die, what a solution
that would be."

There was a moment's pause, and then Derek Kettering laughed outright.

"I like your simple, practical mind, Mirelle, but I am afraid what you
desire won't come to pass. My wife is an extremely healthy person."

"_Eh, bien!_" said Mirelle; "there are accidents."

He looked at her sharply but did not answer.

She went on.

"But you are right, _mon ami_, we must not dwell on possibilities. See
now, my little Dereek, there must be no more talk of this divorce. Your
wife must give up the idea."

"And if she won't?"

The dancer's eyes narrowed to slits.

"I think she will, my friend. She is one of those who would not like
the publicity. There are one or two pretty stories that she would not
like her friends to read in the newspapers."

"What do you mean?" asked Kettering sharply.

Mirelle laughed, her head thrown back.

"_Parbleu!_ I mean the gentleman who calls himself the Comte de la
Roche. I know all about him. I am Parisienne, you remember. He was her
lover before she married you, was he not?"

Kettering took her sharply by the shoulders.

"That is a damned lie," he said, "and please remember that, after all,
you are speaking of my wife."

Mirelle was a little sobered.

"You are extraordinary, you English," she complained. "All the same,
I dare say that you may be right. The Americans are so cold, are they
not? But you will permit me to say, _mon ami_, that she was _in love
with him_ before she married you, and her father stepped in and sent
the Comte about his business. And the little Mademoiselle, she wept
many tears! But she obeyed. Still, you must know as well as I do,
Dereek, that it is a very different story now. She sees him nearly
every day, and on the fourteenth she goes to Paris to meet him."

"How do you know all this?" demanded Kettering.

"Me? I have friends in Paris, my dear Dereek, who know the Comte
intimately. It is all arranged. She is going to the Riviera, so she
says, but in reality the Comte meets her in Paris and--who knows! Yes,
yes, you can take my word for it, it is all arranged."

Derek Kettering stood motionless.

"You see," purred the dancer, "if you are clever, you have her in the
hollow of your hand. You can make things very awkward for her."

"Oh, for God's sake be quiet," cried Kettering. "Shut your cursed
mouth!"

Mirelle flung herself down again on the divan with a laugh. Kettering
caught up his hat and coat and left the flat, banging the door
violently. And still the dancer sat on the divan and laughed softly to
herself. She was not displeased with her work.




                              7. Letters


    "_Mrs. Samuel Harfield presents her compliments to Miss Katherine
    Grey and wishes to point out that under the circumstances Miss Grey
    may not be aware--_"

Mrs. Harfield, having written so far fluently, came to a dead stop,
held up by what has proved an insuperable difficulty to many other
people--namely, the difficulty of expressing oneself fluently in the
third person.

After a minute or two of hesitation, Mrs. Harfield tore up the sheet of
notepaper and started afresh.

    "_Dear Miss Grey--Whilst fully appreciating the adequate way you
    discharged your duties to my Cousin Jane (whose recent death has
    indeed been a severe blow to us all), I cannot but feel--_"

Again Mrs. Harfield came to a stop. Once more the letter was consigned
to the wastepaper-basket. It was not until four false starts had been
made that Mrs. Harfield at last produced an epistle that satisfied her.
It was duly sealed and stamped and addressed to Miss Katherine Grey,
Little Crampton, St. Mary Mead, Kent, and it lay beside that lady's
plate on the following morning at breakfast-time in company with a more
important looking communication in a long blue envelope.

Katherine Grey opened Mrs. Harfield's letter first. The finished
production ran as follows:

    "_Dear Miss Grey--My husband and I wish to express our thanks to
    you for your services to my poor cousin, Jane. Her death has been
    a great blow to us, though we were, of course, aware that her mind
    has been failing for some time past. I understand that her latter
    testamentary dispositions have been of a most peculiar character,
    and they would not hold good, of course, in any court of law. I
    have no doubt that, with your usual good sense, you have already
    realized this fact. If these matters can be arranged privately
    it is always so much better, my husband says. We shall be pleased
    to recommend you most highly for a similar post and hope that you
    will also accept a small present. Believe me, dear Miss Grey, Yours
    cordially,_

                                                 _Mary Anne Harfield._"

Katherine Grey read the letter through, smiled a little, and read it
a second time. Her face as she laid the letter down after the second
reading was distinctly amused. Then she took up the second letter.
After one brief perusal she laid it down and stared very straight in
front of her. This time she did not smile. Indeed, it would have been
hard for any one watching her to guess what emotions lay behind that
quiet, reflective gaze.

Katherine Grey was thirty-three. She came of good family, but her
father had lost all his money, and Katherine had had to work for her
living from an early age. She had been just twenty-three when she had
come to old Mrs. Harfield as companion.

It was generally recognized that old Mrs. Harfield was "difficult."
Companions came and went with startling rapidity. They arrived full of
hope and they usually left in tears. But from the moment Katherine Grey
set foot in Little Crampton, ten years ago, perfect peace had reigned.
No one knows how these things come about. Snake-charmers, they say, are
born, not made. Katherine Grey was born with the power of managing old
ladies, dogs, and small boys, and she did it without any apparent sense
of strain.

At twenty-three she had been a quiet girl with beautiful eyes. At
thirty-three she was a quiet woman, with those same grey eyes, shining
steadily out on the world with a kind of happy serenity that nothing
could shake. Moreover, she had been born with, and still possessed, a
sense of humour.

As she sat at the breakfast-table, staring in front of her, there was a
ring at the bell, accompanied by a very energetic rat-a-tat-tat at the
knocker. In another minute the little maid-servant opened the door and
announced rather breathlessly:

"Dr. Harrison."

The big, middle-aged doctor came bustling in with the energy and
breeziness that had been foreshadowed by his onslaught on the knocker.

"Good morning, Miss Grey."

"Good morning, Dr. Harrison."

"I dropped in early," began the doctor, "in case you should have heard
from one of those Harfield cousins. Mrs. Samuel, she calls herself--a
perfectly poisonous person."

Without a word, Katherine picked up Mrs. Harfield's letter from the
table and gave it to him. With a good deal of amusement she watched his
perusal of it, the drawing together of the bushy eyebrows, the snorts
and grunts of violent disapproval. He dashed it down again on the table.

"Perfectly monstrous," he fumed. "Don't you let it worry you, my dear.
They're talking through their hat. Mrs. Harfield's intellect was as
good as yours or mine and you won't get any one to say the contrary.
They wouldn't have a leg to stand upon, and they know it. All that talk
of taking it into court is pure bluff. Hence, this attempt to get round
you in a hole-and-corner way. And look here, my dear, don't let them
get round you with soft soap either. Don't get fancying it's your duty
to hand over the cash, or any tomfoolery of conscientious scruples."

"I'm afraid it hasn't occurred to me to have scruples," said Katherine.
"All these people are distant relatives of Mrs. Harfield's husband, and
they never came near her or took any notice of her in her lifetime."

"You're a sensible woman," said the doctor. "I know, none better, that
you've had a hard life of it for the last ten years. You're fully
entitled to enjoy the old lady's savings, such as they were."

Katherine smiled thoughtfully.

"Such as they were," she repeated. "You've no idea of the amount,
doctor?"

"Well--enough to bring in five hundred a year or so, I suppose."

Katherine nodded.

"That's what I thought," she said. "Now read this."

She handed him the letter she had taken from the long blue envelope.
The doctor read and uttered an exclamation of utter astonishment.

"Impossible," he muttered. "Impossible."

"She was one of the original shareholders in Mortaulds. Forty years ago
she must have had an income of eight or ten thousand a year. She has
never, I am sure, spent more than four hundred a year. She was always
terribly careful about money. I always believed that she was obliged
to be careful about every penny."

"And all the time the income has accumulated at compound interest. My
dear, you're going to be a very rich woman."

Katherine Grey nodded.

"Yes," she said, "I am."

She spoke in a detached, impersonal tone, as though she were looking at
the situation from outside.

"Well," said the doctor, preparing to depart, "you have all my
congratulations." He flicked Mrs. Samuel Harfield's letter with his
thumb. "Don't worry about that woman and her odious letter."

"It really isn't an odious letter," said Miss Grey tolerantly. "Under
the circumstances, I think it's really quite a natural thing to do."

"I have the gravest suspicions of you sometimes," said the doctor.

"Why?"

"The things that you find perfectly natural."

Katherine Grey laughed.

Doctor Harrison retailed the great news to his wife at lunch-time. She
was very excited about it.

"Fancy old Mrs. Harfield--with all that money. I'm glad she left it to
Katherine Grey. That girl's a saint."

The doctor made a wry face.

"Saints I always imagine must have been difficult people. Katherine
Grey is too human for a saint."

"She's a saint with a sense of humour," said the doctor's wife,
twinkling. "And, though I don't suppose you've ever noticed the fact,
she's extremely good looking."

"Katherine Grey?" The doctor was honestly surprised. "She's got very
nice eyes, I know."

"Oh, you men!" cried his wife. "Blind as bats. Katherine's got all the
makings of a beauty in her. All she wants is clothes!"

"Clothes? What's wrong with her clothes? She always looks very nice."

Mrs. Harrison gave an exasperated sigh, and the doctor rose preparatory
to starting on his rounds.

"You might look in on her, Polly," he suggested.

"I'm going to," said Mrs. Harrison promptly.

She made her call about three o'clock.

"My dear, I'm so glad," she said warmly, as she squeezed Katherine's
hand. "And every one in the village will be glad too."

"It's very nice of you to come and tell me," said Katherine. "I hoped
you would come in because I wanted to ask about Johnnie."

"Oh! Johnnie. Well--"

Johnnie was Mrs. Harrison's youngest son. In another minute she was
off, retailing a long history in which Johnnie's adenoids and tonsils
bulked largely. Katherine listened sympathetically. Habits die hard.
Listening had been her portion for ten years now. "My dear, I wonder if
I ever told you about that naval ball at Portsmouth? When Lord Charles
admired my gown?" And composedly, kindly, Katherine would reply: "I
rather think you have, Mrs. Harfield, but I've forgotten about it.
Won't you tell it me again?" And then the old lady would start off
full swing, with numerous details. And half of Katherine's mind would
be listening, saying the right things mechanically when the old lady
paused....

Now, with that same curious feeling of duality to which she was
accustomed, she listened to Mrs. Harrison.

At the end of half an hour, the latter recalled herself suddenly.

"I've been talking about myself all this time," she exclaimed. "And I
came here to talk about you and your plans."

"I don't know that I've got any yet."

"My dear--you're not going to stay on _here_."

Katherine smiled at the horror in the other's tone.

"No; I think I want to travel. I've never seen much of the world, you
know."

"I should think not. It must have been an awful life for you cooped up
here all these years."

"I don't know," said Katherine. "It gave me a lot of freedom."

She caught the other's gasp, and reddened a little.

"It must sound foolish--saying that. Of course, I hadn't much freedom
in the downright physical sense--"

"I should think not," breathed Mrs. Harrison, remembering that
Katherine had seldom had that useful thing--a "day off."

"But, in a way, being tied physically gives you lots of scope mentally.
You're always free to think. I've had a lovely feeling always of mental
freedom."

Mrs. Harrison shook her head.

"I can't understand that."

"Oh! you would if you'd been in my place. But, all the same, I feel
I want a change. I want--well, I want things to happen. Oh! not to
me--I don't mean that. But to be in the midst of things, exciting
things--even if I'm only the looker-on. You know, things don't happen
in St. Mary Mead."

"They don't indeed," said Mrs. Harrison, with fervour.

"I shall go to London first," said Katherine. "I have to see the
solicitors, anyway. After that, I shall go abroad, I think."

"Very nice."

"But, of course, first of all--"

"Yes?"

"I must get some clothes."

"Exactly what I said to Arthur this morning," cried the doctor's wife.
"You know, Katherine, you could look positively beautiful if you tried."

Miss Grey laughed unaffectedly.

"Oh! I don't think you could ever make a beauty out of me," she said
sincerely. "But I shall enjoy having some really good clothes. I'm
afraid I'm talking about myself an awful lot."

Mrs. Harrison looked at her shrewdly.

"It must be quite a novel experience for you," she said drily.

Katherine went to say good-bye to old Miss Viner before leaving the
village. Miss Viner was two years older than Mrs. Harfield, and her
mind was mainly taken with her own success in outliving her dead friend.

"You wouldn't have thought I'd have outlasted Jane Harfield, would
you?" she demanded triumphantly of Katherine. "We were at school
together, she and I. And here we are, she taken, and I left. Who would
have thought it?"

"You've always eaten brown bread for supper, haven't you?" murmured
Katherine mechanically.

"Fancy your remembering that, my dear. Yes; if Jane Harfield had had a
slice of brown bread every evening and taken a little stimulant with
her meals she might be here to-day."

The old lady paused, nodding her head triumphantly, then added in
sudden remembrance:

"And so you've come into a lot of money, I hear? Well, well. Take care
of it. And you're going up to London to have a good time? Don't think
you'll get married, though, my dear, because you won't. You're not the
kind to attract the men. And, besides, you're getting on. How old are
you now?"

"Thirty-three," Katherine told her.

"Well," remarked Miss Viner doubtfully, "that's not so very bad. You've
lost your first freshness, of course."

"I'm afraid so," said Katherine, much entertained.

"But you're a very nice girl," said Miss Viner kindly. "And I'm sure
there's many a man might do worse than take you for a wife instead of
one of these flibbertigibbets running about nowadays showing more of
their legs than the Creator ever intended them to. Good-bye, my dear,
and I hope you'll enjoy yourself, but things are seldom what they seem
in this life."

Heartened by these prophecies, Katherine took her departure. Half the
village came to see her off at the station, including the little maid
of all work, Alice, who brought a stiff wired nosegay and cried openly.

"There ain't a many like her," sobbed Alice when the train had finally
departed. "I'm sure when Charlie went back on me with that girl from
the Dairy, nobody could have been kinder than Miss Grey was, and though
particular about the brasses and the dust, she was always one to notice
when you'd give a thing an extra rub. Cut myself in little pieces for
her, I would, any day. A real lady, that's what I call her."

Such was Katherine's departure from St. Mary Mead.




                    8. Lady Tamplin Writes a Letter


"Well," said Lady Tamplin, "well."

She laid down the continental _Daily Mail_ and stared out across the
blue waters of the Mediterranean. A branch of golden mimosa, hanging
just above her head, made an effective frame for a very charming
picture. A golden-haired, blue-eyed lady in a very becoming negligee.
That the golden hair owed something to art, as did the pink-and-white
complexion, was undeniable, but the blue of the eyes was Nature's gift,
and at forty-four Lady Tamplin could still rank as a beauty.

Charming as she looked, Lady Tamplin was, for once, not thinking of
herself. That is to say, she was not thinking of her appearance. She
was intent on graver matters.

Lady Tamplin was a well-known figure on the Riviera, and her parties
at the Villa Marguerite were justly celebrated. She was a woman of
considerable experience, and had had four husbands. The first had been
merely an indiscretion, and so was seldom referred to by the lady. He
had had the good sense to die with commendable promptitude, and his
widow thereupon espoused a rich manufacturer of buttons. He too had
departed for another sphere after three years of married life--it was
said after a congenial evening with some boon companions. After him
came Viscount Tamplin, who had placed Rosalie securely on those heights
where she wished to tread. She had retained her title when she married
for a fourth time. This fourth venture had been undertaken for pure
pleasure. Mr. Charles Evans, an extremely good-looking young man of
twenty-seven, with delightful manners, a keen love of sport, and an
appreciation of this world's goods, had no money of his own whatsoever.

Lady Tamplin was very pleased and satisfied with life generally,
but she had occasional faint preoccupations about money. The button
manufacturer had left his widow a considerable fortune, but, as Lady
Tamplin was wont to say, "what with one thing and another--" (one thing
being the depreciation of stocks owing to the War, and the other the
extravagances of the late Lord Tamplin). She was still comfortably
off. But to be merely comfortably off is hardly satisfactory to one of
Rosalie Tamplin's temperament.

So, on this particular January morning, she opened her blue eyes
extremely wide as she read a certain item of news and uttered that
non-committal monosyllable "Well." The only other occupant of the
balcony was her daughter, the Hon. Lenox Tamplin. A daughter such as
Lenox was a sad thorn in Lady Tamplin's side, a girl with no kind
of tact, who actually looked older than her age, and whose peculiar
sardonic form of humour was, to say the least of it, uncomfortable.

"Darling," said Lady Tamplin, "just fancy."

"What is it?"

Lady Tamplin picked up the _Daily Mail_, handed it to her daughter, and
indicated with an agitated fore finger the paragraph of interest.

Lenox read it without any of the signs of agitation shown by her
mother. She handed back the paper.

"What about it?" she asked. "It is the sort of thing that is always
happening. Cheese-paring old women are always dying in villages and
leaving fortunes of millions to their humble companions."

"Yes, dear, I know," said her mother, "and I dare say the fortune
is not anything like as large as they say it is; newspapers are so
inaccurate. But even if you cut it down by half--"

"Well," said Lenox, "it has not been left to us."

"Not exactly, dear," said Lady Tamplin; "but this girl, this Katherine
Grey, is actually a cousin of mine. One of the Worcestershire Greys,
the Edgeworth lot. My very own cousin! Fancy!"

"Ah-ha," said Lenox.

"And I was wondering--" said her mother.

"What there was in it for us," finished Lenox, with that sideways smile
that her mother always found difficult to understand.

"Oh, darling," said Lady Tamplin, on a faint note of reproach.

It was very faint, because Rosalie Tamplin was used to her daughter's
outspokenness and to what she called Lenox's uncomfortable way of
putting things.

"I was wondering," said Lady Tamplin, again drawing her artistically
pencilled brows together, "whether--oh, good morning, Chubby darling;
are you going to play tennis? How nice!"

Chubby, thus addressed, smiled kindly at her, remarked perfunctorily,
"How topping you look in that peach-coloured thing," and drifted past
them and down the steps.

"The dear thing," said Lady Tamplin, looking affectionately after her
husband. "Let me see, what was I saying? Ah!" She switched her mind
back to business once more. "I was wondering--"

"Oh, for God's sake get on with it. That is the third time you have
said that."

"Well, dear," said Lady Tamplin, "I was thinking that it would be very
nice if I wrote to dear Katherine and suggested that she should pay
us a little visit out here. Naturally, she is quite out of touch with
Society. It would be nicer for her to be launched by one of her own
people. An advantage for her and an advantage for us."

"How much do you think you would get her to cough up?" asked Lenox.

Her mother looked at her reproachfully and murmured:

"We should have to come to some financial arrangement, of course. What
with one thing and another--the War--your poor father--"

"And Chubby now," said Lenox. "He is an expensive luxury if you like."

"She was a nice girl as I remember her," murmured Lady Tamplin,
pursuing her own line of thought--"quiet, never wanted to shove herself
forward, not a beauty, and never a man-hunter."

"She will leave Chubby alone, then?" said Lenox.

Lady Tamplin looked at her in protest. "Chubby would never--" she began.

"No," said Lenox, "I don't believe he would; he knows a jolly sight too
well which way his bread is buttered."

"Darling," said Lady Tamplin, "you have such a coarse way of putting
things."

"Sorry," said Lenox.

Lady Tamplin gathered up the _Daily Mail_ and her negligee, a
vanity-bag, and various odd letters.

"I shall write to dear Katherine at once," she said, "and remind her of
the dear old days at Edgeworth."

She went into the house, a light of purpose shining in her eyes.

Unlike Mrs. Samuel Harfield, correspondence flowed easily from her pen.
She covered four sheets without pause or effort, and on re-reading it
found no occasion to alter a word.

Katherine received it on the morning of her arrival in London. Whether
she read between the lines of it or not is another matter. She put it
in her handbag and started out to keep the appointment she had made
with Mrs. Harfield's lawyers.

The firm was an old-established one in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and
after a few minutes' delay Katherine was shown into the presence of
the senior partner, a kindly, elderly man with shrewd blue eyes and a
fatherly manner.

They discussed Mrs. Harfield's will and various legal matters for some
minutes, then Katherine handed the lawyer Mrs. Samuel's letter.

"I had better show you this, I suppose," she said, "though it is really
rather ridiculous."

He read it with a slight smile.

"Rather a crude attempt, Miss Grey. I need hardly tell you, I suppose,
that these people have no claim of any kind upon the estate, and if
they endeavour to contest the will no court will uphold them."

"I thought as much."

"Human nature is not always very wise. In Mrs. Samuel Harfield's place,
I should have been more inclined to make an appeal to your generosity."

"That is one of the things I wanted to speak to you about. I should
like a certain sum to go to these people."

"There is no obligation."

"I know that."

"And they will not take it in the spirit it is meant. They will
probably regard it as an attempt to pay them off, though they will not
refuse it on that account."

"I can see that, and it can't be helped."

"I should advise you, Miss Grey, to put that idea out of your head."

Katherine shook her head. "You are quite right, I know, but I should
like it done all the same."

"They will grab at the money and abuse you all the more afterwards."

"Well," said Katherine, "let them if they like. We all have our own
ways of enjoying ourselves. They were, after all, Mrs. Harfield's only
relatives, and though they despised her as a poor relation and paid no
attention to her when she was alive, it seems to me unfair that they
should be cut off with nothing."

She carried her point, though the lawyer was still unwilling, and
she presently went out into the streets of London with a comfortable
assurance that she could spend money freely and make what plans she
liked for the future. Her first action was to visit the establishment
of a famous dressmaker.

A slim, elderly Frenchwoman, rather like a dreaming duchess, received
her, and Katherine spoke with a certain _naïveté_.

"I want, if I may, to put myself in your hands. I have been very poor
all my life and know nothing about clothes, but now I have come into
some money and want to look really well dressed."

The Frenchwoman was charmed. She had an artist's temperament, which
had been soured earlier in the morning by a visit from an Argentine
meat queen, who had insisted on having those models least suited to
her flamboyant type of beauty. She scrutinized Katherine with keen,
clever eyes. "Yes--yes, it will be a pleasure. Mademoiselle has a
very good figure; for her the simple lines will be best. She is also
_très anglaise_. Some people it would offend them if I said that,
but Mademoiselle, no. _Une belle Anglaise_, there is no style more
delightful."

The demeanour of a dreaming duchess was suddenly put off. She screamed
out directions to various mannequins. "Clothilde, Virginie, quickly, my
little ones, the little _tailleur gris clair_ and the _robe de soirée_
'_soupir d'automne_.' Marcelle, my child, the little mimosa suit of
crêpe de chine."

It was a charming morning. Marcelle, Clothilde, Virginie, bored
and scornful, passed slowly round, squirming and wriggling in the
time-honoured fashion of mannequins. The Duchess stood by Katherine and
made entries in a small notebook.

"An excellent choice, Mademoiselle. Mademoiselle has great _goût_. Yes,
indeed. Mademoiselle cannot do better than those little suits if she is
going to the Riviera, as I suppose, this winter."

"Let me see that evening dress once more," said Katherine--"the pinky
mauve one."

Virginie appeared, circling slowly.

"That is the prettiest of all," said Katherine, as she surveyed the
exquisite draperies of mauve and grey and blue. "What do you call it?"

"_Soupir d'automne_; yes, yes, that is truly the dress of Mademoiselle."

What was there in these words that came back to Katherine with a faint
feeling of sadness after she had left the dressmaking establishment?

"'_Soupir d'automne; that is truly the dress of Mademoiselle._'"
Autumn, yes, it was autumn for her. She who had never known spring or
summer, and would never know them now. Something she had lost never
could be given to her again. These years of servitude in St. Mary
Mead--and all the while life passing by.

"I am an idiot," said Katherine. "I am an idiot. What do I want? Why, I
was more contented a month ago than I am now."

She drew out from her handbag the letter she had received that morning
from Lady Tamplin. Katherine was no fool. She understood the _nuances_
of that letter as well as anybody and the reason of Lady Tamplin's
sudden show of affection towards a long-forgotten cousin was not lost
upon her. It was for profit and not for pleasure that Lady Tamplin was
so anxious for the company of her dear cousin. Well, why not? There
would be profit on both sides.

"I will go," said Katherine.

She was walking down Piccadilly at the moment, and turned into Cook's
to clinch the matter then and there. She had to wait for a few minutes.
The man with whom the clerk was engaged was also going to the Riviera.
Every one, she felt, was going. Well, for the first time in her life,
she, too, would be doing what "everybody did."

The man in front of her turned abruptly, and she stepped into his
place. She made her demand to the clerk, but at the same time half of
her mind was busy with something else. That man's face--in some vague
way it was familiar to her. Where had she seen him before? Suddenly
she remembered. It was in the Savoy outside her room that morning.
She had collided with him in the passage. Rather an odd coincidence
that she should run into him twice in a day. She glanced over her
shoulder, rendered uneasy by something, she knew not what. The man was
standing in the doorway looking back at her. A cold shiver passed over
Katherine; she had a haunting sense of tragedy, of doom impending....

Then she shook the impression from her with her usual good sense and
turned her whole attention to what the clerk was saying.




                          9. An Offer Refused


It was rarely that Derek Kettering allowed his temper to get the better
of him. An easy-going insouciance was his chief characteristic, and it
had stood him in good stead in more than one tight corner. Even now, by
the time he had left Mirelle's flat, he had cooled down. He had need of
coolness. The corner he was in now was a tighter one than he had ever
been in before, and unforeseen factors had arisen with which, for the
moment, he did not know how to deal.

He strolled along deep in thought. His brow was furrowed, and there was
none of the easy, jaunty manner which sat so well upon him. Various
possibilities floated through his mind. It might have been said of
Derek Kettering that he was less of a fool than he looked. He saw
several roads that he might take--one in particular. If he shrank
from it, it was for the moment only. Desperate ills need desperate
remedies. He had gauged his father-in-law correctly. A war between
Derek Kettering and Rufus Van Aldin could end only one way. Derek
damned money and the power of money vehemently to himself. He walked
up St. James's Street, across Piccadilly, and strolled along it in the
direction of Piccadilly Circus. As he passed the offices of Messrs.
Thomas Cook & Sons his footsteps slackened. He walked on, however,
still turning the matter over in his mind. Finally, he gave a brief nod
of his head, turned sharply--so sharply as to collide with a couple of
pedestrians who were following in his footsteps, and went back the way
he had come. This time he did not pass Cook's, but went in. The office
was comparatively empty, and he got attended to at once.

"I want to go to Nice next week. Will you give me particulars?"

"What date, sir?"

"The 14th. What is the best train?"

"Well, of course, _the_ best train is what they call the 'Blue Train.'
You avoid the tiresome Customs business at Calais."

Derek nodded. He knew all this, none better.

"The 14th," murmured the clerk; "that is rather soon. The Blue Train is
nearly always all booked up."

"See if there is a berth left," said Derek. "If there is not--" He left
the sentence unfinished, with a curious smile on his face.

The clerk disappeared for a few minutes, and presently returned.

"That is all right, sir; still three berths left. I will book you one
of them. What name?"

"Pavett," said Derek. He gave the address of his rooms in Jermyn Street.

The clerk nodded, finished writing it down, wished Derek good morning
politely, and turned his attention to the next client.

"I want to go to Nice--on the 14th. Isn't there a train called the Blue
Train?"

Derek looked round sharply.

Coincidence--a strange coincidence. He remembered his own
half-whimsical words to Mirelle, "_Portrait of a lady with grey eyes.
I don't suppose I shall ever see her again._" But he _had_ seen her
again, and, what was more, she proposed to travel to the Riviera on the
same day as he did.

Just for a moment a shiver passed over him; in some ways he was
superstitious. He had said, half-laughingly, that this woman might
bring him bad luck. Suppose--suppose that should prove to be true. From
the doorway he looked back at her as she stood talking to the clerk.
For once his memory had not played him false. A lady--a lady in every
sense of the word. Not very young, not singularly beautiful. But with
something--grey eyes that might perhaps see too much. He knew as he
went out of the door that in some way he was afraid of this woman. He
had a sense of fatality.

He went back to his rooms in Jermyn Street and summoned his man.

"Take this cheque, Pavett, cash it first thing in the morning, and
go around to Cook's in Piccadilly. They will have some tickets there
booked in your name, pay for them, and bring them back."

"Very good, sir."

Pavett withdrew.

Derek strolled over to a side-table and picked up a handful of letters.
They were of a type only too familiar. Bills, small bills and large
bills, one and all pressing for payment. The tone of the demands was
still polite. Derek knew how soon that polite tone would change if--if
certain news became public property.

He flung himself moodily into a large, leather-covered chair. A damned
hole--that was what he was in. Yes, a damned hole! And ways of getting
out of that damned hole were not too promising.

Pavett appeared with a discreet cough.

"A gentleman to see you--sir--Major Knighton."

"Knighton, eh?"

Derek sat up, frowned, became suddenly alert. He said in a softer tone,
almost to himself: "Knighton--I wonder what is in the wind now?"

"Shall I--er--show him in, sir?"

His master nodded. When Knighton entered the room he found a charming
and genial host awaiting him.

"Very good of you to look me up," said Derek.

Knighton was nervous.

The other's keen eyes noticed that at once. The errand on which the
secretary had come was clearly distasteful to him. He replied almost
mechanically to Derek's easy flow of conversation. He declined a drink,
and, if anything, his manner became stiffer than before. Derek appeared
at last to notice it.

"Well," he said cheerfully, "what does my esteemed father-in-law want
with me? You have come on his business, I take it?"

Knighton did not smile in reply.

"I have, yes," he said carefully. "I--I wish Mr. Van Aldin had chosen
some one else."

Derek raised his eyebrows in mock dismay.

"Is it as bad as all that? I am not very thin skinned, I can assure
you, Knighton."

"No," said Knighton; "but this--"

He paused.

Derek eyed him keenly.

"Go on, out with it," he said kindly. "I can imagine my dear
father-in-law's errands might not always be pleasant ones."

Knighton cleared his throat. He spoke formally in tones that he strove
to render free of embarrassment.

"I am directed by Mr. Van Aldin to make you a definite offer."

"An offer?" For a moment Derek showed his surprise. Knighton's opening
words were clearly not what he had expected. He offered a cigarette to
Knighton, lit one himself, and sank back in his chair, murmuring in a
slightly sardonic voice:

"An offer? That sounds rather interesting."

"Shall I go on?"

"Please. You must forgive my surprise, but it seems to me that my dear
father-in-law has rather climbed down since our chat this morning. And
climbing down is not what one associates with strong men, Napoleons of
finance, etc. It shows--I think it shows that he finds his position
weaker than he thought it."

Knighton listened politely to the easy, mocking voice, but no sign of
any kind showed itself on his rather stolid countenance. He waited
until Derek had finished, and then he said quietly:

"I will state the proposition in the fewest possible words."

"Go on."

Knighton did not look at the other. His voice was curt and
matter-of-fact.

"The matter is simply this. Mrs. Kettering, as you know, is about to
file a petition for divorce. If the case goes undefended you will
receive one hundred thousand on the day that the decree is made
absolute."

Derek, in the act of lighting his cigarette, suddenly stopped dead.

"A hundred thousand!" he said sharply. "Dollars?"

"Pounds."

There was dead silence for at least two minutes. Kettering had his
brows together thinking. A hundred thousand pounds. It meant Mirelle
and a continuance of his pleasant, carefree life. It meant that Van
Aldin knew something. Van Aldin did not pay for nothing. He got up and
stood by the chimney-piece.

"And in the event of my refusing his handsome offer?" he asked, with a
cold, ironical politeness.

Knighton made a deprecating gesture.

"I can assure you, Mr. Kettering," he said earnestly, "that it is with
the utmost unwillingness that I came here with this message."

"That's all right," said Kettering. "Don't distress yourself; it's not
your fault. Now then--I asked you a question, will you answer it?"

Knighton also rose. He spoke more reluctantly than before.

"In the event of your refusing this proposition," he said, "Mr. Van
Aldin wished me to tell you in plain words that he proposes to break
you. Just that."

Kettering raised his eyebrows, but he retained his light, amused manner.

"Well, well!" he said, "I suppose he can do it. I certainly should not
be able to put up much of a fight against America's man of millions. A
hundred thousand! If you are going to bribe a man there is nothing like
doing it thoroughly. Supposing I were to tell you that for two hundred
thousand I'd do what he wanted, what then?"

"I would take your message back to Mr. Van Aldin," said Knighton
unemotionally. "Is that your answer?"

"No," said Derek; "funnily enough it is not. You can go back to my
father-in-law and tell him to take himself and his bribes to hell. Is
that clear?"

"Perfectly," said Knighton. He got up, hesitated, and then flushed.
"I--you will allow me to say, Mr. Kettering, that I am glad you have
answered as you have."

Derek did not reply. When the other had left the room he remained for a
minute or two lost in thought. A curious smile came to his lips.

"And that is that," he said softly.




                         10. On the Blue Train


"Dad!"

Mrs. Kettering started violently. Her nerves were not completely under
control this morning. Very perfectly dressed in a long mink coat and
a little hat of Chinese lacquer red, she had been walking along the
crowded platform of Victoria deep in thought, and her father's sudden
appearance and hearty greeting had an unlooked-for effect upon her.

"Why, Ruth, how you jumped!"

"I didn't expect to see you, I suppose, Dad. You said good-bye to me
last night and said you had a conference this morning."

"So I have," said Van Aldin, "but you are more to me than any number of
darned conferences. I came to take a last look at you, since I am not
going to see you for some time."

"That is very sweet of you, Dad. I wish you were coming too."

"What would you say if I did?"

The remark was merely a joking one. He was surprised to see the quick
colour flame in Ruth's cheeks. For a moment he almost thought he saw
dismay flash out of her eyes. She laughed uncertainly and nervously.

"Just for a moment I really thought you meant it," she said.

"Would you have been pleased?"

"Of course." She spoke with exaggerated emphasis.

"Well," said Van Aldin, "that's good."

"It isn't really for very long, Dad," continued Ruth; "you know, you
are coming out next month."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin unemotionally, "sometimes I guess I will go to one
of these big guys in Harley Street and have him tell me that I need
sunshine and change of air right away."

"Don't be so lazy," cried Ruth; "next month is ever so much nicer
than this month out there. You have got all sorts of things you can't
possibly leave just now."

"Well, that's so, I suppose," said Van Aldin, with a sigh. "You had
better be getting on board this train of yours, Ruth. Where is your
seat?"

Ruth Kettering looked vaguely up at the train. At the door of one of
the Pullman cars a thin, tall woman dressed in black was standing--Ruth
Kettering's maid. She drew aside as her mistress came up to her.

"I have put your dressing-case under your seat, Madam, in case you
should need it. Shall I take the rugs, or will you require one?"

"No, no, I shan't want one. Better go and find your own seat now,
Mason."

"Yes, Madam."

The maid departed.

Van Aldin entered the Pullman car with Ruth. She found her seat, and
Van Aldin deposited various papers and magazines on the table in front
of her. The seat opposite to her was already taken, and the American
gave a cursory glance at its occupant. He had a fleeting impression of
attractive grey eyes and a neat travelling costume. He indulged in a
little more desultory conversation with Ruth, the kind of talk peculiar
to those seeing other people off by train.

Presently, as whistles blew, he glanced at his watch.

"I had best be clearing out of here. Good-bye, my dear. Don't worry, I
will attend to things."

"Oh, father!"

He turned back sharply. There had been something in Ruth's voice,
something so entirely foreign to her usual manner, that he was
startled. It was almost a cry of despair. She had made an impulsive
movement towards him, but in another minute she was mistress of herself
once more.

"Till next month," she said cheerfully.

Two minutes later the train started.

Ruth sat very still, biting her under lip and trying hard to keep the
unaccustomed tears from her eyes. She felt a sudden sense of horrible
desolation. There was a wild longing upon her to jump out of the train
and to go back before it was too late. She, so calm, so self-assured,
for the first time in her life felt like a leaf swept by the wind. If
her father knew--what would he say?

Madness! Yes, just that, madness! For the first time in her life she
was swept away by emotion, swept away to the point of doing a thing
which even she knew to be incredibly foolish and reckless. She was
enough Van Aldin's daughter to realize her own folly, and level headed
enough to condemn her own action. But she was his daughter in another
sense also. She had that same iron determination that would have what
it wanted, and once it had made up its mind would not be balked. From
her cradle she had been self-willed; the very circumstances of her life
had developed that self-will in her. It drove her now remorselessly.
Well, the die was cast. She must go through with it now.

She looked up, and her eyes met those of the woman sitting opposite.
She had a sudden fancy that in some way this other woman had read her
mind. She saw in those grey eyes understanding and--yes--compassion.

It was only a fleeting impression. The faces of both women hardened
to well-bred impassiveness. Mrs. Kettering took up a magazine, and
Katherine Grey looked out of the window and watched a seemingly endless
vista of depressing streets and suburban houses.

Ruth found an increasing difficulty in fixing her mind on the printed
page in front of her. In spite of herself, a thousand apprehensions
preyed on her mind. What a fool she had been! What a fool she was! Like
all cool and self-sufficient people, when she did lose her self-control
she lost it thoroughly. It was too late.... Was it too late? Oh, for
some one to speak to, for some one to advise her. She had never before
had such a wish; she would have scorned the idea of relying on any
judgment other than her own, but now--what was the matter with her?
Panic. Yes, that would describe it best--panic. She, Ruth Kettering,
was completely and utterly panic stricken.

She stole a covert glance at the figure opposite. If only she knew some
one like that, some nice, cool, calm, sympathetic creature. That was
the sort of person one could talk to. But you can't, of course, confide
in a stranger. And Ruth smiled to herself a little at the idea. She
picked up the magazine again. Really she must control herself. After
all, she had thought all this out. She had decided of her own free
will. What happiness had she ever had in her life up to now? She said
to herself restlessly: "Why shouldn't I be happy? No one will ever
know."

It seemed no time before Dover was reached. Ruth was a good sailor. She
disliked the cold, and was glad to reach the shelter of the private
cabin she had telegraphed for. Although she would not have admitted
the fact, Ruth was in some ways superstitious. She was of the order of
people to whom coincidence appeals. After disembarking at Calais and
settling herself down with her maid in her double compartment in the
Blue Train, she went along to the luncheon car. It was with a little
shock of surprise that she found herself set down to a small table
with, opposite her, the same woman who had been her _vis-à-vis_ in the
Pullman. A faint smile came to the lips of both women.

"This is quite a coincidence," said Mrs. Kettering.

"I know," said Katherine; "it is odd the way things happen."

A flying attendant shot up to them with the wonderful velocity always
displayed by the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits and deposited
two cups of soup. By the time the omelette succeeded the soup they
were chatting together in friendly fashion.

"It will be heavenly to get into the sunshine," sighed Ruth.

"I am sure it will be a wonderful feeling."

"You know the Riviera well?"

"No; this is my first visit."

"Fancy that."

"You go every year, I expect?"

"Practically. January and February in London are horrible."

"I have always lived in the country. They are not very inspiring months
there either. Mostly mud."

"What made you suddenly decide to travel?"

"Money," said Katherine. "For ten years I have been a paid companion
with just enough money of my own to buy myself strong country shoes;
now I have been left what seems to me a fortune, though I dare say it
would not seem so to you."

"Now I wonder why you say that--that it would not seem so to me."

Katherine laughed. "I don't really know. I suppose one forms
impressions without thinking of it. I put you down in my own mind as
one of the very rich of the earth. It was just an impression. I dare
say I am wrong."

"No," said Ruth, "you are not wrong." She had suddenly become very
grave. "I wish you would tell me what other impressions you formed
about me?"

"I--"

Ruth swept on disregarding the other's embarrassment.

"Oh, please, don't be conventional. I want to know. As we left Victoria
I looked across at you, and I had the sort of feeling that you--well,
understood what was going on in my mind."

"I can assure you I am not a mind reader," said Katherine, smiling.

"No; but will you tell me, please, just what you thought." Ruth's
eagerness was so intense and so sincere that she carried her point.

"I will tell you if you like, but you must not think me impertinent. I
thought that for some reason you were in great distress of mind, and I
was sorry for you."

"You are right. You are quite right. I am in terrible trouble. I--I
should like to tell you something about it, if I may."

"Oh, dear," Katherine thought to herself, "how extraordinarily alike
the world seems to be everywhere! People were always telling me things
in St. Mary Mead, and it is just the same thing here, and I don't
really want to hear anybody's troubles!"

She replied politely:

"Do tell me."

They were just finishing their lunch. Ruth gulped down her coffee, rose
from her seat, and quite oblivious of the fact that Katherine had not
begun to sip her coffee, said: "Come to my compartment with me."

They were two single compartments with a communicating door between
them. In the second of them a thin maid, whom Katherine had noticed at
Victoria, was sitting very upright on the seat, clutching a big scarlet
morocco case with the initials R. V. K. on it. Mrs. Kettering pulled
the communicating door to and sank down on the seat. Katherine sat down
beside her.

"I am in trouble and I don't know what to do. There is a man whom I
am fond of--very fond of indeed. We cared for each other when we were
young, and we were thrust apart most brutally and unjustly. Now we have
come together again."

"Yes?"

"I--I am going to meet him now. Oh! I dare say you think it is all
wrong, but you don't know the circumstances. My husband is impossible.
He has treated me disgracefully."

"Yes," said Katherine again.

"What I feel so badly about is this. I have deceived my father--it was
he who came to see me off at Victoria to-day. He wishes me to divorce
my husband, and, of course, he has no idea--that I am going to meet
this other man. He would think it extraordinarily foolish."

"Well, don't you think it is?"

"I--I suppose it is."

Ruth Kettering looked down at her hands; they were shaking violently.

"But I can't draw back now."

"Why not?"

"I--it is all arranged, and it would break his heart."

"Don't you believe it," said Katherine robustly; "hearts are pretty
tough."

"He will think I have no courage, no strength of purpose."

"It seems to me an awfully silly thing that you are going to do," said
Katherine. "I think you realize that yourself."

Ruth Kettering buried her face in her hands. "I don't know--I don't
know. Ever since I left Victoria I have had a horrible feeling of
something--something that is coming to me very soon--that I can't
escape."

She clutched convulsively at Katherine's hand.

"You must think I am mad talking to you like this, but I tell you I
know something horrible is going to happen."

"Don't think it," said Katherine; "try to pull yourself together. You
could send your father a wire from Paris, if you like, and he would
come to you at once."

The other brightened.

"Yes, I could do that. Dear old Dad. It is queer--but I never knew
until to-day how terribly fond of him I am." She sat up and dried her
eyes with a handkerchief. "I have been very foolish. Thank you so much
for letting me talk to you. I don't know why I got into such a queer,
hysterical state."

She got up. "I am quite all right now. I suppose, really, I just needed
some one to talk to. I can't think now why I have been making such an
absolute fool of myself."

Katherine got up too.

"I am so glad you feel better," she said, trying to make her voice
sound as conventional as possible. She was only too well aware that the
aftermath of confidences is embarrassment. She added tactfully:

"I must be going back to my own compartment."

She emerged into the corridor at the same time as the maid was also
coming out from the next door. The latter looked towards Katherine,
over her shoulder, and an expression of intense surprise showed itself
on her face. Katherine turned also, but by that time whoever it was
who had aroused the maid's interest had retreated into his or her
compartment, and the corridor was empty. Katherine walked down it to
regain her own place, which was in the next coach. As she passed the
end compartment the door opened and a woman's face looked out for a
moment and then pulled the door to sharply. It was a face not easily
forgotten, as Katherine was to know when she saw it again. A beautiful
face, oval and dark, very heavily made up in a bizarre fashion.
Katherine had a feeling that she had seen it before somewhere.

She regained her own compartment without other adventure and sat for
some time thinking of the confidence which had just been made to her.
She wondered idly who the woman in the mink coat might be, wondered
also how the end of her story would turn out.

"If I have stopped any one from making an idiot of themselves, I
suppose I have done good work," she thought to herself. "But who knows?
That is the kind of woman who is hard-headed and egotistical all her
life, and it might be good for her to do the other sort of thing for
a change. Oh, well--I don't suppose I shall ever see her again. She
certainly won't want to see _me_ again. That is the worst of letting
people tell you things. They never do."

She hoped that she would not be given the same place at dinner. She
reflected, not without humour, that it might be awkward for both of
them. Leaning back with her head against a cushion she felt tired
and vaguely depressed. They had reached Paris, and the slow journey
round the _ceinture_, with its interminable stops and waits, was very
wearisome. When they arrived at the Gare de Lyon she was glad to get
out and walk up and down the platform. The keen cold air was refreshing
after the steam-heated train. She observed with a smile that her
friend of the mink coat was solving the possible awkwardness of the
dinner problem in her own way. A dinner basket was being handed up and
received through the window by the maid.

When the train started once more, and dinner was announced by a violent
ringing of bells, Katherine went along to it much relieved in mind. Her
_vis-à-vis_ to-night was of an entirely different kind--a small man,
distinctly foreign in appearance, with a rigidly waxed moustache and
an egg-shaped head which he carried rather on one side. Katherine had
taken in a book to dinner with her. She found the little man's eyes
fixed upon it with a kind of twinkling amusement.

"I see, Madame, that you have a _roman policier_. You are fond of such
things?"

"They amuse me," Katherine admitted.

The little man nodded with the air of complete understanding.

"They have a good sale always, so I am told. Now why is that, eh,
Mademoiselle? I ask it of you as a student of human nature--why should
that be?"

Katherine felt more and more amused.

"Perhaps they give one the illusion of living an exciting life," she
suggested.

He nodded gravely.

"Yes; there is something in that."

"Of course, one knows that such things don't really happen," Katherine
was continuing, but he interrupted her sharply.

"Sometimes, Mademoiselle! Sometimes! I who speak to you--they have
happened to _me_."

She threw him a quick, interested glance.

"Some day, who knows, _you_ might be in the thick of things," he went
on. "It is all chance."

"I don't think it is likely," said Katherine. "Nothing of that kind
ever happens to me."

He leaned forward.

"Would you like it to?"

The question startled her, and she drew in her breath sharply.

"It is my fancy, perhaps," said the little man, as he dexterously
polished one of the forks, "but I think that you have a yearning in you
for interesting happenings. _Eh bien_, Mademoiselle, all through my
life I have observed one thing--'All one wants one gets!' Who knows?"
His face screwed itself up comically. "You may get more than you
bargain for."

"Is that a prophecy?" asked Katherine, smiling as she rose from the
table.

The little man shook his head.

"I never prophesy," he declared pompously. "It is true that I have the
habit of being always right--but I do not boast of it. Good-night,
Mademoiselle, and may you sleep well."

Katherine went back along the train amused and entertained by her
little neighbour. She passed the open door of her friend's compartment
and saw the conductor making up the bed. The lady in the mink coat
was standing looking out of the window. The second compartment, as
Katherine saw through the communicating door, was empty, with rugs and
bags heaped up on the seat. The maid was not there.

Katherine found her own bed prepared, and since she was tired, she went
to bed and switched off her light about half-past nine.

She woke with a sudden start; how much time had passed she did not
know. Glancing at her watch, she found that it had stopped. A feeling
of intense uneasiness pervaded her and grew stronger moment by moment.
At last she got up, threw her dressing-gown round her shoulders, and
stepped out into the corridor. The whole train seemed wrapped in
slumber. Katherine let down the window and sat by it for some minutes,
drinking in the cool night air and trying vainly to calm her uneasy
fears. She presently decided that she would go along to the end and ask
the conductor for the right time so that she could set her watch. She
found, however, that his little chair was vacant. She hesitated for a
moment and then walked through into the next coach. She looked down
the long, dim line of the corridor and saw, to her surprise, that a
man was standing with his hand on the door of the compartment occupied
by the lady in the mink coat. That is to say, she thought it was the
compartment. Probably, however, she was mistaken. He stood there for a
moment or two with his back to her, seeming uncertain and hesitating
in his attitude. Then he slowly turned, and with an odd feeling of
fatality, Katherine recognized him as the same man whom she had noticed
twice before--once in the corridor of the Savoy hotel and once in
Cook's offices. Then he opened the door of the compartment and passed
in, drawing it to behind him.

An idea flashed across Katherine's mind. Could this be the man of whom
the other woman had spoken--the man she was journeying to meet.

Then Katherine told herself that she was romancing. In all probability
she had mistaken the compartment.

She went back to her own carriage. Five minutes later the train
slackened speed. There was the long plaintive hiss of the Westinghouse
brake, and a few minutes later the train came to a stop at Lyons.




                              11. Murder


Katherine wakened the next morning to brilliant sunshine. She went
along to breakfast early, but met none of her acquaintances of the day
before. When she returned to her compartment it had just been restored
to its day-time appearance by the conductor, a dark man with a drooping
moustache and melancholy face.

"Madame is fortunate," he said; "the sun shines. It is always a great
disappointment to passengers when they arrive on a grey morning."

"I should have been disappointed, certainly," said Katherine.

The man prepared to depart.

"We are rather late, Madame," he said. "I will let you know just before
we get to Nice."

Katherine nodded. She sat by the window, entranced by the sunlit
panorama. The palm trees, the deep blue of the sea, the bright yellow
mimosa came with all the charm of novelty to the woman who for
fourteen years had known only the drab winters of England.

When they arrived at Cannes, Katherine got out and walked up and down
the platform. She was curious about the lady in the mink coat, and
looked up at the windows of her compartment. The blinds were still
drawn down--the only ones to be so on the whole train. Katherine
wondered a little, and when she re-entered the train she passed along
the corridor and noticed that these two compartments were still
shuttered and closed. The lady of the mink coat was clearly no early
riser.

Presently the conductor came to her and told her that in a few minutes
the train would arrive at Nice. Katherine handed him a tip; the man
thanked her, but still lingered. There was something odd about him.
Katherine, who had at first wondered whether the tip had not been big
enough, was now convinced that something far more serious was amiss.
His face was of a sickly pallor, he was shaking all over, and looked
as if he had been frightened out of his life. He was eyeing her in a
curious manner. Presently he said abruptly: "Madame will excuse me, but
is she expecting friends to meet her at Nice?"

"Probably," said Katherine. "Why?"

But the man merely shook his head and murmured something that Katherine
could not catch and moved away, not reappearing until the train came to
rest at the station, when he started handing her belongings down from
the window.

Katherine stood for a moment or two on the platform rather at a loss,
but a fair young man with an ingenuous face came up to her and said
rather hesitatingly:

"Miss Grey, is it not?"

Katherine said that it was, and the young man beamed upon her
seraphically and murmured:

"I am Chubby, you know--Lady Tamplin's husband. I expect she mentioned
me, but perhaps she forgot. Have you got your _billet de bagages_? I
lost mine when I came out this year, and you would not believe the fuss
they made about it. Regular French red tape!"

Katherine produced it, and was just about to move off beside him when a
very gentle and insidious voice murmured in her ear:

"A little moment, Madame, if you please."

Katherine turned to behold an individual who made up for
insignificance of stature by a large quantity of gold lace and uniform.
The individual explained. "There were certain formalities. Madame
would perhaps be so kind as to accompany him. The regulations of the
police--" He threw up his arms. "Absurd, doubtless, but there it was."

Mr. Chubby Evans listened with a very imperfect comprehension, his
French being of a limited order.

"So like the French," murmured Mr. Evans. He was one of those staunch
patriotic Britons who, having made a portion of a foreign country their
own, strongly resent the original inhabitants of it. "Always up to
some silly dodge or other. They've never tackled people on the station
before, though. This is something quite new. I suppose you'll have to
go."

Katherine departed with her guide. Somewhat to her surprise, he led
her towards a siding where a coach of the departed train had been
shunted. He invited her to mount into this, and, preceding her down
the corridor, held aside the door of one of the compartments. In it
was a pompous-looking official personage, and with him a nondescript
being who appeared to be a clerk. The pompous-looking personage rose
politely, bowed to Katherine, and said:

"You will excuse me, Madame, but there are certain formalities to be
complied with. Madame speaks French, I trust?"

"Sufficiently, I think, Monsieur," replied Katherine in that language.

"That is good. Pray be seated, Madame. I am M. Caux, the Commissary of
Police." He blew out his chest importantly, and Katherine tried to look
sufficiently impressed.

"You wish to see my passport?" she inquired. "Here it is."

The Commissary eyed her keenly and gave a little grunt.

"Thank you, Madame," he said, taking the passport from her. He cleared
his throat. "But what I really desire is a little information."

"Information?"

The Commissary nodded his head slowly.

"About a lady who has been a fellow-passenger of yours. You lunched
with her yesterday."

"I am afraid I can't tell you anything about her. We fell into
conversation over our meal, but she is a complete stranger to me. I
have never seen her before."

"And yet," said the Commissary sharply, "you returned to her
compartment with her after lunch and sat talking for some time?"

"Yes," said Katherine; "that is true."

The Commissary seemed to expect her to say something more. He looked at
her encouragingly.

"Yes, Madame?"

"Well, Monsieur?" said Katherine.

"You can, perhaps, give me some kind of idea of that conversation?"

"I could," said Katherine, "but at the moment I see no reason to do so."

In somewhat British fashion she felt annoyed. This foreign official
seemed to her impertinent.

"No reason?" cried the Commissary. "Oh yes, Madame, I can assure you
that there _is_ a reason."

"Then perhaps you will give it to me."

The Commissary rubbed his chin thoughtfully for a minute or two without
speaking.

"Madame," he said at last, "the reason is very simple. The lady in
question was found dead in her compartment this morning."

"Dead!" gasped Katherine. "What was it--heart failure?"

"No," said the Commissary in a reflective, dreamy voice. "No--she was
murdered."

"Murdered!" cried Katherine.

"So you see, Madame, why we are anxious for any information we can
possibly get."

"But surely her maid--"

"The maid has disappeared."

"Oh!" Katherine paused to assemble her thoughts.

"Since the conductor had seen you talking with her in her compartment,
he quite naturally reported the fact to the police, and that is why,
Madame, we have detained you, in the hope of gaining some information."

"I am very sorry," said Katherine; "I don't even know her name."

"Her name is Kettering. That we know from her passport and from the
labels on her luggage. If we--"

There was a knock on the compartment door. M. Caux frowned. He opened
it about six inches.

"What is the matter?" he said peremptorily. "I cannot be disturbed."

The egg-shaped head of Katherine's dinner acquaintance showed itself in
the aperture. On his face was a beaming smile.

"My name," he said, "is Hercule Poirot."

"Not," the Commissary stammered, "not _the_ Hercule Poirot?"

"The same," said M. Poirot. "I remember meeting you once, M. Caux, at
the _Sûreté_ in Paris, though doubtless you have forgotten me?"

"Not at all, Monsieur, not at all," declared the Commissary heartily.
"But enter, I pray of you. You know of this--"

"Yes, I know," said Hercule Poirot. "I came to see if I might be of any
assistance?"

"We should be flattered," replied the Commissary promptly. "Let me
present you, M. Poirot, to"--he consulted the passport he still held
in his hand--"to Madame--er--Mademoiselle Grey."

Poirot smiled across at Katherine.

"It is strange, is it not," he murmured, "that my words should have
come true so quickly?"

"Mademoiselle, alas! can tell us very little," said the Commissary.

"I have been explaining," said Katherine, "that this poor lady was a
complete stranger to me."

Poirot nodded.

"But she talked to you, did she not?" he said gently. "You formed an
impression--is it not so?"

"Yes," said Katherine thoughtfully. "I suppose I did."

"And that impression was--"

"Yes, Mademoiselle"--the Commissary jerked himself forward--"let us by
all means have your impressions."

Katherine sat turning the whole thing over in her mind. She felt in
a way as if she were betraying a confidence, but with that ugly word
"Murder" ringing in her ears she dared not keep anything back. Too much
might hang upon it. So, as nearly as she could, she repeated word for
word the conversation she had had with the dead woman.

"That is interesting," said the Commissary, glancing at the other. "Eh,
M. Poirot, that is interesting? Whether it has anything to do with the
crime--" He left the sentence unfinished.

"I suppose it could not be suicide," said Katherine, rather doubtfully.

"No," said the Commissary, "it could not be suicide. She was strangled
with a length of black cord."

"Oh!" Katherine shivered. M. Caux spread out his hands apologetically.
"It is not nice--no. I think that our train robbers are more brutal
than they are in your country."

"It is horrible."

"Yes, yes"--he was soothing and apologetic--"but you have great
courage, Mademoiselle. At once, as soon as I saw you, I said to myself,
'Mademoiselle has great courage.' That is why I am going to ask you
to do something more--something distressing, but I assure you very
necessary."

Katherine looked at him apprehensively.

He spread out his hands apologetically.

"I am going to ask you, Mademoiselle, to be so good as to accompany me
to the next compartment."

"Must I?" asked Katherine in a low voice.

"Some one must identify her," said the Commissary, "and since the maid
has disappeared"--he coughed significantly--"you appear to be the
person who has seen most of her since she joined the train."

"Very well," said Katherine quietly; "if it is necessary--"

She rose. Poirot gave her a little nod of approval.

"Mademoiselle is sensible," he said. "May I accompany you, M. Caux?"

"Enchanted, my dear M. Poirot."

They went out into the corridor, and M. Caux unlocked the door of the
dead woman's compartment. The blinds on the far side had been drawn
half-way up to admit light. The dead woman lay on the berth to their
left, in so natural a posture that one could have thought her asleep.
The bedclothes were drawn up over her, and her head was turned to the
wall, so that only the red auburn curls showed. Very gently M. Caux
laid a hand on her shoulder and turned the body back so that the face
came into view. Katherine flinched a little and dug her nails into
her palms. A heavy blow had disfigured the features almost beyond
recognition. Poirot gave a sharp exclamation.

"When was that done, I wonder?" he demanded. "Before death or after?"

"The doctor says after," said M. Caux.

"Strange," said Poirot, drawing his brows together. He turned to
Katherine. "Be brave, Mademoiselle; look at her well. Are you sure that
this is the woman you talked to in the train yesterday?"

Katherine had good nerves. She steeled herself to look long and
earnestly at the recumbent figure. Then she leaned forward and took up
the dead woman's hand.

"I am quite sure," she replied at length. "The face is too disfigured
to recognize, but the build and carriage and hair are exact, and
besides I noticed _this_"--she pointed to a tiny mole on the dead
woman's wrist--"while I was talking to her."

"_Bon_," approved Poirot. "You are an excellent witness, Mademoiselle.
There is, then, no question as to the identity, but it is strange, all
the same." He frowned down on the dead woman in perplexity.

M. Caux shrugged his shoulders.

"The murderer was carried away by rage, doubtless," he suggested.

"If she had been struck down, it would have been comprehensible," mused
Poirot, "but the man who strangled her slipped up behind and caught
her unawares. A little choke--a little gurgle--that is all that would
be heard, and then afterwards--that smashing blow on her face. Now
why? Did he hope that if the face were unrecognizable she might not
be identified? Or did he hate her so much that he could not resist
striking that blow even after she was dead?"

Katherine shuddered, and he turned at once to her kindly.

"You must not let me distress you, Mademoiselle," he said. "To you this
is all very new and terrible. To me, alas! it is an old story. One
moment, I pray of you both."

They stood against the door watching him as he went quickly round the
compartment. He noted the dead woman's clothes neatly folded on the
end of the berth, the big fur coat that hung from a hook, and the
little red lacquer hat tossed up on the rack. Then he passed through
into the adjoining compartment, that in which Katherine had seen the
maid sitting. Here the berth had not been made up. Three or four rugs
were piled loosely on the seat; there was a hat-box and a couple of
suit-cases. He turned suddenly to Katherine.

"You were in here yesterday," he said. "Do you see anything changed,
anything missing?"

Katherine looked carefully round both compartments.

"Yes," she said, "there is something missing--a scarlet morocco case.
It had the initials 'R. V. K.' on it. It might have been a small
dressing-case or a big jewel-case. When I saw it, the maid was holding
it."

"Ah!" said Poirot.

"But, surely," said Katherine. "I--of course, I don't know anything
about such things, but surely it is plain enough, if the maid and the
jewel-case are missing?"

"You mean that it was the maid who was the thief? No, Mademoiselle;
there is a very good reason against that."

"What?"

"The maid was left behind in Paris."

He turned to Poirot.

"I should like you to hear the conductor's story yourself," he murmured
confidentially. "It is very suggestive."

"Mademoiselle would doubtless like to hear it also," said Poirot. "You
do not object, Monsieur le Commissaire?"

"No," said the Commissary, who clearly did object very much. "No,
certainly, M. Poirot, if you say so. You have finished here?"

"I think so. One little minute."

He had been turning over the rugs, and now he took one to the window
and looked at it, picking something off it with his fingers.

"What is it?" demanded M. Caux sharply.

"Four auburn hairs." He bent over the dead woman. "Yes, they are from
the head of Madame."

"And what of it? Do you attach importance to them?"

Poirot let the rug drop back on the seat.

"What is important? What is not? One cannot say at this stage. But we
must note each little fact carefully."

They went back again into the first compartment, and in a minute or two
the conductor of the carriage arrived to be questioned.

"Your name is Pierre Michel?" said the Commissary.

"Yes, Monsieur le Commissaire."

"I should like you to repeat to this gentleman"--he indicated
Poirot--"the story that you told me as to what happened in Paris."

"Very good, Monsieur le Commissaire. It was after we had left the Gare
de Lyon. I came along to make the beds, thinking that Madame would be
at dinner, but she had a dinner basket in her compartment. She said
to me that she had been obliged to leave her maid behind in Paris, so
that I need make up only one berth. She took her dinner basket into the
adjoining compartment, and sat there while I made up the bed; then she
told me that she did not wish to be wakened early in the morning, that
she liked to sleep on. I told her I quite understood, and she wished me
'good-night.'"

"You yourself did not go into the adjoining compartment?"

"No, Monsieur."

"Then you did not happen to notice if a scarlet morocco case was
amongst the luggage there?"

"No, Monsieur, I did not."

"Would it have been possible for a man to have been concealed in the
adjoining compartment?"

The conductor reflected.

"The door was half open," he said. "If a man had stood behind that door
I should not have been able to see him, but he would, of course, have
been perfectly visible to Madame when she went in there."

"Quite so," said Poirot. "Is there anything more you have to tell us?"

"I think that is all, Monsieur. I can remember nothing else."

"And now this morning?" prompted Poirot.

"As Madame had ordered, I did not disturb her. It was not until just
before Cannes that I ventured to knock at the door. Getting no reply, I
opened it. The lady appeared to be in her bed asleep. I took her by the
shoulder to rouse her, and then--"

"And then you saw what had happened," volunteered Poirot. "_Très bien._
I think I know all I want to know."

"I hope, Monsieur le Commissaire, it is not that I have been guilty of
any negligence," said the man piteously. "Such an affair to happen on
the Blue Train! It is horrible."

"Console yourself," said the Commissary. "Everything will be done to
keep the affair as quiet as possible, if only in the interests of
justice. I cannot think you have been guilty of any negligence."

"And Monsieur le Commissaire will report as much to the Company?"

"But certainly, but certainly," said M. Caux impatiently. "That will do
now."

The conductor withdrew.

"According to the medical evidence," said the Commissary, "the lady
was probably dead before the train reached Lyons. Who then was the
murderer? From Mademoiselle's story, it seems clear that somewhere on
her journey she was to meet this man of whom she spoke. Her action in
getting rid of the maid seems significant. Did the man join the train
at Paris, and did she conceal him in the adjoining compartment? If so,
they may have quarrelled, and he may have killed her in a fit of rage.
That is one possibility. The other, and the more likely to my mind, is
that her assailant was a train robber travelling on the train; that
he stole along the corridor unseen by the conductor, killed her, and
went off with the red morocco case, which doubtless contained jewels of
some value. In all probability he left the train at Lyons, and we have
already telegraphed to the station there for full particulars of any
one seen leaving the train."

"Or he might have come on to Nice," suggested Poirot.

"He might," agreed the Commissary, "but that would be a very bold
course."

Poirot let a minute or two go by before speaking, and then he said:

"In the latter case you think the man was an ordinary train robber?"

The Commissary shrugged his shoulders.

"It depends. We must get hold of the maid. It is possible that she has
the red morocco case with her. If so, then the man of whom she spoke to
Mademoiselle may be concerned in the case, and the affair is a crime
of passion. I myself think the solution of a train robber is the more
probable. These bandits have become very bold of late."

Poirot looked suddenly across to Katherine.

"And you, Mademoiselle," he said, "you heard and saw nothing during the
night?"

"Nothing," said Katherine.

Poirot turned to the Commissary.

"We need detain Mademoiselle no longer, I think," he suggested.

The latter nodded.

"She will leave us her address?" he said.

Katherine gave him the name of Lady Tamplin's villa. Poirot made her a
little bow.

"You permit that I see you again, Mademoiselle?" he said. "Or have you
so many friends that your time will be all taken up?"

"On the contrary," said Katherine, "I shall have plenty of leisure, and
I shall be very pleased to see you again."

"Excellent," said Poirot, and gave her a little friendly nod. "This
shall be a _'roman policier' à nous_. We will investigate this affair
together."




                      12. At the Villa Marguerite


"Then you were really in the thick of it all!" said Lady Tamplin
enviously. "My dear, how thrilling!" She opened her china blue eyes
very wide and gave a little sigh.

"A real murder," said Mr. Evans gloatingly.

"Of course Chubby had no idea of anything of the kind," went on Lady
Tamplin; "he simply could _not_ imagine why the police wanted you. My
dear, what an opportunity! I think, you know--yes, I certainly think
something might be made out of this."

A calculating look rather marred the ingenuousness of the blue eyes.

Katherine felt slightly uncomfortable. They were just finishing lunch,
and she looked in turn at the three people sitting round the table.
Lady Tamplin, full of practical schemes; Mr. Evans, beaming with naïve
appreciation, and Lenox with a queer crooked smile on her dark face.

"Marvellous luck," murmured Chubby; "I wish I could have gone along
with you--and seen--all the exhibits."

His tone was wistful and childlike.

Katherine said nothing. The police had laid no injunctions of secrecy
upon her, and it was clearly impossible to suppress the bare facts or
try to keep them from her hostess. But she did rather wish it had been
possible to do so.

"Yes," said Lady Tamplin, coming suddenly out of her reverie, "I do
think something might be done. A little account, you know, cleverly
written up. An eye-witness, a feminine touch: '_How I chatted with the
dead woman, little thinking_--' that sort of thing, you know."

"Rot!" said Lenox.

"You have no idea," said Lady Tamplin in a soft, wistful voice, "what
newspapers will pay for a little titbit! Written, of course, by some
one of really unimpeachable social position. You would not like to do
it yourself, I dare say, Katherine dear, but just give me the bare
bones of it, and _I_ will manage the whole thing for you. Mr. de
Haviland is a special friend of mine. We have a little understanding
together. A most delightful man--not at all reporterish. How does the
idea strike you, Katherine?"

"I would much prefer to do nothing of the kind," said Katherine bluntly.

Lady Tamplin was rather disconcerted at this uncompromising refusal.
She sighed and turned to the elucidation of further details.

"A very striking-looking woman, you said? I wonder now who she could
have been. You didn't hear her name?"

"It was mentioned," Katherine admitted, "but I can't remember it. You
see, I was rather upset."

"I should think so," said Mr. Evans; "it must have been a beastly
shock."

It is to be doubted whether, even if Katherine had remembered the
name, she would have admitted the fact. Lady Tamplin's remorseless
cross-examination was making her restive. Lenox, who was observant in
her own way, noticed this, and offered to take Katherine upstairs to
see her room. She left her there, remarking kindly before she went:
"You mustn't mind Mother; she would make a few pennies' profit out of
her dying grandmother if she could."

Lenox went down again to find her mother and her step-father discussing
the newcomer.

"Presentable," said Lady Tamplin, "quite presentable. Her clothes are
all right. That grey thing is the same model that Gladys Cooper wore in
_Palm Trees in Egypt_."

"Have you noticed her eyes--what?" interposed Mr. Evans.

"Never mind her eyes, Chubby," said Lady Tamplin tartly; "we are
discussing the things that really matter."

"Oh, quite," said Mr. Evans, and retired into his shell.

"She doesn't seem to me very--malleable," said Lady Tamplin, rather
hesitating to choose the right word.

"She has all the instincts of a lady, as they say in books," said
Lenox, with a grin.

"Narrow-minded," murmured Lady Tamplin. "Inevitable under the
circumstances, I suppose."

"I expect you will do your best to broaden her," said Lenox, with a
grin, "but you will have your work cut out. Just now, you noticed, she
stuck down her fore feet and laid back her ears and refused to budge."

"Anyway," said Lady Tamplin hopefully, "she doesn't look to me at all
mean. Some people, when they come into money, seem to attach undue
importance to it."

"Oh, you'll easily touch her for what you want," said Lenox; "and,
after all, that is all that matters, isn't it? That is what she is here
for."

"She is my own cousin," said Lady Tamplin, with dignity.

"Cousin, eh?" said Mr. Evans, waking up again. "I suppose I call her
Katherine, don't I?"

"It is of no importance at all what you call her, Chubby," said Lady
Tamplin.

"Good," said Mr. Evans; "then I will. Do you suppose she plays tennis?"
he added hopefully.

"Of course not," said Lady Tamplin. "She has been a companion, I tell
you. Companions don't play tennis--or golf. They might possibly play
golf-croquet, but I have always understood that they wind wool and wash
dogs most of the day."

"O God!" said Mr. Evans; "do they really?"

Lenox drifted upstairs again to Katherine's room. "Can I help you?" she
asked rather perfunctorily.

On Katherine's disclaimer, Lenox sat on the edge of the bed and stared
thoughtfully at her guest.

"Why did you come?" she said at last. "To us, I mean. We're not your
sort."

"Oh, I am anxious to get into Society."

"Don't be an ass," said Lenox promptly, detecting the flicker of a
smile. "You know what I mean well enough. You are not a bit what I
thought you would be. I say, you _have_ got some decent clothes." She
sighed. "Clothes are no good to me. I was born awkward. It's a pity,
because I love them."

"I love them too," said Katherine, "but it has not been much use my
loving them up to now. Do you think this is nice?"

She and Lenox discussed several models with artistic fervour.

"I like you," said Lenox suddenly. "I came up to warn you not to be
taken in by Mother, but I think now that there is no need to do that.
You are frightfully sincere and upright and all those queer things, but
you are not a fool. Oh hell! what is it now?"

Lady Tamplin's voice was calling plaintively from the hall:

"Lenox, Derek has just rung up. He wants to come to dinner to-night.
Will it be all right? I mean, we haven't got anything awkward, like
quails, have we?"

Lenox reassured her and came back into Katherine's room. Her face
looked brighter and less sullen.

"I'm glad old Derek is coming," she said; "you'll like him."

"Who is Derek?"

"He is Lord Leconbury's son, married a rich American woman. Women are
simply potty about him."

"Why?"

"Oh, the usual reason--very good-looking and a regular bad lot. Every
one goes off their head about him."

"Do you?"

"Sometimes I do," said Lenox, "and sometimes I think I would like to
marry a nice curate and live in the country and grow things in frames."
She paused a minute, and then added, "An Irish curate would be best,
and then I should hunt."

After a minute or two she reverted to her former theme. "There is
something queer about Derek. All that family are a bit potty--mad
gamblers, you know. In the old days they used to gamble away their
wives and their estates, and did most reckless things just for the love
of it. Derek would have made a perfect highwayman--debonair and gay,
just the right manner." She moved to the door. "Well, come down when
you feel like it."

Left alone, Katherine gave herself up to thought. Just at present she
felt thoroughly ill at ease and jarred by her surroundings. The shock
of the discovery in the train and the reception of the news by her
new friends jarred upon her susceptibilities. She thought long and
earnestly about the murdered woman. She had been sorry for Ruth, but
she could not honestly say that she had liked her. She had divined only
too well the ruthless egoism that was the keynote of her personality,
and it repelled her.

She had been amused and a trifle hurt by the other's cool dismissal of
her when she had served her turn. That she had come to some decision,
Katherine was quite certain, but she wondered now what that decision
had been. Whatever it was, death had stepped in and made all decisions
meaningless. Strange that it should have been so, and that a brutal
crime should have been the ending of that fateful journey. But suddenly
Katherine remembered a small fact that she ought, perhaps, to have told
the police--a fact that had for the moment escaped her memory. Was it
of any real importance? She had certainly thought that she had seen a
man going into that particular compartment, but she realized that she
might easily have been mistaken. It might have been the compartment
next door, and certainly the man in question could be no train robber.
She recalled him very clearly as she had seen him on those two
previous occasions--once at the Savoy and once at Cook's office. No,
doubtless she had been mistaken. He had not gone into the dead woman's
compartment, and it was perhaps as well that she had said nothing to
the police. She might have done incalculable harm by doing so.

She went down to join the others on the terrace outside. Through the
branches of mimosa, she looked out over the blue of the Mediterranean,
and, whilst listening with half an ear to Lady Tamplin's chatter, she
was glad that she had come. This was better than St. Mary Mead.

That evening she put on the mauvy pink dress that went by the name of
_soupir d'automne_, and after smiling at her reflection in the mirror,
went downstairs with, for the first time in her life, a faint feeling
of shyness.

Most of Lady Tamplin's guests had arrived, and since noise was the
essential of Lady Tamplin's parties, the din was already terrific.
Chubby rushed up to Katherine, pressed a cocktail upon her, and took
her under his wing.

"Oh, here you are, Derek," cried Lady Tamplin, as the door opened to
admit the last comer. "Now at last we can have something to eat. I am
starving."

Katherine looked across the room. She was startled. So this--was Derek,
and she realized that she was not surprised. She had always known that
she would some day meet the man whom she had seen three times by such
a curious chain of coincidences. She thought, too, that he recognized
her. He paused abruptly in what he was saying to Lady Tamplin, and
went on again as though with an effort. They all went into dinner, and
Katherine found that he was placed beside her. He turned to her at once
with a vivid smile.

"I knew I was going to meet you soon," he remarked, "but I never dreamt
that it would be here. It had to be, you know. Once at the Savoy and
once at Cook's--never twice without three times. Don't say you can't
remember me or never noticed me. I insist upon your pretending that you
noticed me, anyway."

"Oh, I did," said Katherine; "but this is not the third time. It is the
fourth. I saw you on the Blue Train."

"On the Blue Train!" Something undefinable came over his manner; she
could not have said just what it was. It was as though he had received
a check, a setback. Then he said carelessly:

"What was the rumpus this morning? Somebody had died, hadn't they?"

"Yes," said Katherine slowly; "somebody had died."

"You shouldn't die on a train," remarked Derek flippantly. "I believe
it causes all sorts of legal and international complications, and it
gives the train an excuse for being even later than usual."

"Mr. Kettering?" A stout American lady, who was sitting opposite,
leaned forward and spoke to him with the deliberate intonation of her
race. "Mr. Kettering, I do believe you have forgotten me, and I thought
you such a perfectly lovely man."

Derek leaned forward, answering her, and Katherine sat almost dazed.

Kettering! That was the name, of course! She remembered it now--but
what a strange, ironical situation! Here was this man whom she had seen
go into his wife's compartment last night, who had left her alive and
well, and now he was sitting at dinner, quite unconscious of the fate
that had befallen her. Of that there was no doubt. He did not know.

A servant was leaning over Derek, handing him a note and murmuring in
his ear. With a word of excuse to Lady Tamplin, he broke it open, and
an expression of utter astonishment came over his face as he read; then
he looked at his hostess.

"This is most extraordinary. I say, Rosalie, I am afraid I will have to
leave you. The Prefect of Police wants to see me at once. I can't think
what about."

"Your sins have found you out," remarked Lenox.

"They must have," said Derek; "probably some idiotic nonsense, but I
suppose I shall have to push off to the Prefecture. How dare the old
boy rout me out from dinner? It ought to be something deadly serious to
justify that," and he laughed as he pushed back his chair and rose to
leave the room.




                     13. Van Aldin Gets a Telegram


On the afternoon of the 15th of February a thick yellow fog had settled
down on London. Rufus Van Aldin was in his suite at the Savoy and was
making the most of the atmospheric conditions by working double time.
Knighton was overjoyed. He had found it difficult of late to get his
employer to concentrate on the matters in hand. When he had ventured to
urge certain courses, Van Aldin had put him off with a curt word. But
now Van Aldin seemed to be throwing himself into work with redoubled
energy, and the secretary made the most of his opportunities. Always
tactful, he plied the spur so unobtrusively that Van Aldin never
suspected it.

Yet in the middle of this absorption in business matters, one
little fact lay at the back of Van Aldin's mind. A chance remark of
Knighton's, uttered by the secretary in all unconsciousness, had given
rise to it. It now festered unseen, gradually reaching further and
further forward into Van Aldin's consciousness, until at last, in spite
of himself, he had to yield to its insistence.

He listened to what Knighton was saying with his usual air of keen
attention, but in reality not one word of it penetrated his mind. He
nodded automatically, however, and the secretary turned to some other
papers. As he was sorting them out, his employer spoke:

"Do you mind telling me that over again, Knighton?"

For a moment Knighton was at a loss.

"You mean about this, sir?" He held up a closely written Company report.

"No, no," said Van Aldin; "what you told me about seeing Ruth's maid in
Paris last night. I can't make it out. You must have been mistaken."

"I can't have been mistaken, sir; I actually spoke to her."

"Well, tell me the whole thing again."

Knighton complied.

"I had fixed up the deal with Bartheimers," he explained, "and had gone
back to the Ritz to pick up my traps preparatory to having dinner and
catching the nine o'clock train from the Gare du Nord. At the reception
desk I saw a woman whom I was quite sure was Mrs. Kettering's maid. I
went up to her and asked if Mrs. Kettering was staying there."

"Yes, yes," said Van Aldin. "Of course. Naturally. And she told you
that Ruth had gone on to the Riviera and had sent her to the Ritz to
await further orders there?"

"Exactly that, sir."

"It is very odd," said Van Aldin. "Very odd, indeed, unless the woman
had been impertinent or something of that kind."

"In that case," objected Knighton, "surely Mrs. Kettering would have
paid her down a sum of money, and told her to go back to England. She
would hardly have sent her to the Ritz."

"No," muttered the millionaire; "that's true."

He was about to say something further, but checked himself. He was
fond of Knighton and liked and trusted him, but he could hardly discuss
his daughter's private affairs with his secretary. He had already felt
hurt by Ruth's lack of frankness, and this chance information which had
come to him did nothing to allay his misgivings.

Why had Ruth got rid of her maid in Paris? What possible object or
motive could she have had in so doing?

He reflected for a moment or two on the curious combination of chance.
How should it have occurred to Ruth, except as the wildest coincidence,
that the first person that the maid should run across in Paris should
be her father's secretary? Ah, but that was the way things happened.
That was the way things got found out.

He winced at the last phrase; it had arisen with complete naturalness
to his mind. Was there then "something to be found out"? He hated to
put this question to himself; he had no doubt of the answer. The answer
was--he was sure of it--Armand de la Roche.

It was bitter to Van Aldin that a daughter of his should be gulled
by such a man, yet he was forced to admit that she was in good
company--that other well-bred and intelligent women had succumbed just
as easily to the Count's fascination. Men saw through him, women did
not.

He sought now for a phrase that would allay any suspicion that his
secretary might have felt.

"Ruth is always changing her mind about things at a moment's notice,"
he remarked, and then he added in a would-be careless tone: "The maid
didn't give any--er--reason for this change of plan?"

Knighton was careful to make his voice as natural as possible as he
replied:

"She said, sir, that Mrs. Kettering had met a friend unexpectedly."

"Is that so?"

The secretary's practised ears caught the note of strain underlying the
seemingly casual tone.

"Oh, I see. Man or woman?"

"I think she said a man, sir."

Van Aldin nodded. His worst fears were being realized. He rose from
his chair, and began pacing up and down the room, a habit of his when
agitated. Unable to contain his feelings any longer, he burst forth:

"There is one thing no man can do, and that is to get a woman to
listen to reason. Somehow or other, they don't seem to have any kind of
_sense_. Talk of woman's instinct--why, it is well known all the world
over that a woman is the surest mark for any rascally swindler. Not one
in ten of them knows a scoundrel when she meets one; they can be preyed
on by any good-looking fellow with a soft side to his tongue. If I had
my way--"

He was interrupted. A page-boy entered with a telegram. Van Aldin tore
it open, and his face went a sudden chalky white. He caught hold of the
back of a chair to steady himself, and waved the page-boy from the room.

"What's the matter, sir?"

Knighton had risen in concern.

"Ruth!" said Van Aldin hoarsely.

"Mrs. Kettering?"

"Killed!"

"An accident to the train?"

Van Aldin shook his head.

"No. From this it seems she has been robbed as well. They don't use the
word, Knighton, but my poor girl has been murdered."

"Oh, my God, sir!"

Van Aldin tapped the telegram with his forefinger.

"This is from the police at Nice. I must go out there by the first
train."

Knighton was efficient as ever. He glanced at the clock.

"Five o'clock from Victoria, sir."

"That's right. You will come with me, Knighton. Tell my man, Archer,
and pack your own things. See to everything here. I want to go round to
Curzon Street."

The telephone rang sharply, and the secretary lifted the receiver.

"Yes; who is it?"

Then to Van Aldin.

"Mr. Goby, sir."

"Goby? I can't see him now. No--wait, we have plenty of time. Tell them
to send him up."

Van Aldin was a strong man. Already he had recovered that iron calm of
his. Few people would have noticed anything amiss in his greeting to
Mr. Goby.

"I am pressed for time, Goby. Got anything important to tell me?"

Mr. Goby coughed.

"The movements of Mr. Kettering, sir. You wished them reported to you."

"Yes--well?"

"Mr. Kettering, sir, left London for the Riviera yesterday morning."

"What?"

Something in his voice must have startled Mr. Goby. That worthy
gentleman departed from his usual practice of never looking at the
person to whom he was talking, and stole a fleeting glance at the
millionaire.

"What train did he go on?" demanded Van Aldin.

"The Blue Train, sir."

Mr. Goby coughed again and spoke to the clock on the mantelpiece.

"Mademoiselle Mirelle, the dancer from the Parthenon, went by the same
train."




                         14. Ada Mason's Story


"I cannot repeat to you often enough, Monsieur, our horror, our
consternation, and the deep sympathy we feel for you."

Thus M. Carrège, the Juge d'Instruction, addressed Van Aldin. M.
Caux, the Commissary, made sympathetic noises in his throat. Van
Aldin brushed away horror, consternation, and sympathy with an abrupt
gesture. The scene was the Examining Magistrate's room at Nice. Besides
M. Carrège, the Commissary, and Van Aldin, there was a further person
in the room. It was that person who now spoke.

"M. Van Aldin," he said, "desires action--swift action."

"Ah!" cried the Commissary, "I have not yet presented you. M. Van
Aldin, this is M. Hercule Poirot; you have doubtless heard of him.
Although he has retired from his profession for some years now,
his name is still a household word as one of the greatest living
detectives."

"Pleased to meet you, M. Poirot," said Van Aldin, falling back
mechanically on a formula that he had discarded some years ago. "You
have retired from your profession?"

"That is so, Monsieur. Now I enjoy the world."

The little man made a grandiloquent gesture.

"M. Poirot happened to be travelling on the Blue Train," explained the
Commissary, "and he has been so kind as to assist us out of his vast
experience."

The millionaire looked at Poirot keenly. Then he said unexpectedly:

"I am a very rich man, M. Poirot. It is usually said that a rich man
labours under the belief that he can buy everything and every one. That
is not true. I am a big man in my way, and one big man can ask a favour
from another big man."

Poirot nodded a quick appreciation.

"That is very well said, M. Van Aldin. I place myself entirely at your
service."

"Thank you," said Van Aldin. "I can only say call upon me at any time,
and you will not find me ungrateful. And now, gentlemen, to business."

"I propose," said M. Carrège, "to interrogate the maid, Ada Mason. You
have her here, I understand?"

"Yes," said Van Aldin. "We picked her up in Paris in passing through.
She was very upset to hear of her mistress's death, but she tells her
story coherently enough."

"We will have her in, then," said M. Carrège.

He rang the bell on his desk, and in a few minutes Ada Mason entered
the room.

She was very neatly dressed in black, and the tip of her nose was red.
She had exchanged her grey travelling gloves for a pair of black suède
ones. She cast a look round the Examining Magistrate's office in some
trepidation, and seemed relieved at the presence of her mistress's
father. The Examining Magistrate prided himself on his geniality of
manner, and did his best to put her at her ease. He was helped in this
by Poirot, who acted as interpreter, and whose friendly manner was
reassuring to the Englishwoman.

"Your name is Ada Mason; is that right?"

"Ada Beatrice I was christened, sir," said Mason primly.

"Just so. And we can understand, Mason, that this has all been very
distressing."

"Oh, indeed it has, sir. I have been with many ladies and always given
satisfaction, I hope, and I never dreamt of anything of this kind
happening in any situation where I was."

"No, no," said M. Carrège.

"Naturally I have read of such things, of course, in the Sunday papers.
And then I always have understood that those foreign trains--" She
suddenly checked her flow, remembering that the gentlemen who were
speaking to her were of the same nationality as the trains.

"Now let us talk this affair over," said M. Carrège. "There was, I
understand, no question of your staying in Paris when you started from
London?"

"Oh no, sir. We were to go straight through to Nice."

"Have you ever been abroad with your mistress before?"

"No, sir. I had only been with her two months, you see."

"Did she seem quite as usual when starting on this journey?"

"She was worried like and a bit upset, and she was rather irritable and
difficult to please."

M. Carrège nodded.

"Now then, Mason, what was the first you heard of your stopping in
Paris?"

"It was at the place they call the Gare de Lyon, sir. My mistress was
thinking of getting out and walking up and down the platform. She was
just going out into the corridor when she gave a sudden exclamation,
and came back into her compartment with a gentleman. She shut the door
between her carriage and mine, so that I didn't see or hear anything,
till she suddenly opened it again and told me that she had changed her
plans. She gave me some money and told me to get out and go to the
Ritz. They knew her well there, she said, and would give me a room. I
was to wait there until I heard from her; she would wire me what she
wanted me to do. I had just time to get my things together and jump out
of the train before it started off. It was a rush."

"While Mrs. Kettering was telling you this, where was the gentleman?"

"He was standing in the other compartment, sir, looking out of the
window."

"Can you describe him to us?"

"Well, you see, sir, I hardly saw him. He had his back to me most of
the time. He was a tall gentleman and dark; that's all I can say. He
was dressed very like any other gentleman in a dark blue overcoat and a
grey hat."

"Was he one of the passengers on the train?"

"I don't think so, sir; I took it that he had come to the station to
see Mrs. Kettering in passing through. Of course he might have been one
of the passengers; I never thought of that."

Mason seemed a little flurried by the suggestion.

"Ah!" M. Carrège passed lightly to another subject. "Your mistress
later requested the conductor not to rouse her early in the morning.
Was that a likely thing for her to do, do you think?"

"Oh yes, sir. The mistress never ate any breakfast and she didn't sleep
well at nights, so that she liked sleeping on in the morning."

Again M. Carrège passed to another subject.

"Amongst the luggage there was a scarlet morocco case, was there not?"
he asked. "Your mistress's jewel-case?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you take that case to the Ritz?"

"_Me_ take the mistress's jewel-case to the Ritz! Oh no, indeed, sir."
Mason's tones were horrified.

"You left it behind you in the carriage?"

"Yes, sir."

"Had your mistress many jewels with her, do you know?"

"A fair amount, sir; made me a bit uneasy sometimes, I can tell you,
with those nasty tales you hear of being robbed in foreign countries.
They were insured, I know, but all the same it seemed a frightful risk.
Why, the rubies alone, the mistress told me, were worth several hundred
thousand pounds."

"The rubies! What rubies?" barked Van Aldin suddenly.

Mason turned to him.

"I think it was you who gave them to her, sir, not very long ago."

"My God!" cried Van Aldin. "You don't say she had those rubies with
her? I told her to leave them at the Bank."

Mason gave once more the discreet cough which was apparently part of
her stock-in-trade as a lady's maid. This time it expressed a good
deal. It expressed far more clearly than words could have done, that
Mason's mistress had been a lady who took her own way.

"Ruth must have been mad," muttered Van Aldin. "What on earth could
have possessed her?"

M. Carrège in turn gave vent to a cough, again a cough of significance.
It riveted Van Aldin's attention on him.

"For the moment," said M. Carrège, addressing Mason, "I think that is
all. If you will go into the next room, Mademoiselle, they will read
over to you the questions and answers, and you will sign accordingly."

Mason went out escorted by the clerk, and Van Aldin said immediately to
the Magistrate:

"Well?"

M. Carrège opened a drawer in his desk, took out a letter, and handed
it across to Van Aldin.

"This was found in Madame's handbag."

    _"Chère Amie" (the letter ran)--"I will obey you; I will be
    prudent, discreet--all those things that a lover most hates. Paris
    would perhaps have been unwise, but the Isles d'Or are far away
    from the world, and you may be assured that nothing will leak out.
    It is like you and your divine sympathy to be so interested in the
    work on famous jewels that I am writing. It will, indeed, be an
    extraordinary privilege to actually see and handle these historic
    rubies. I am devoting a special passage to 'Heart of Fire.' My
    wonderful one! Soon I will make up to you for all those sad years
    of separation and emptiness.--Your ever-adoring,_

                                                            "_Armand._"




                       15. The Comte de la Roche


Van Aldin read the letter through in silence. His face turned a dull
angry crimson. The men watching him saw the veins start out on his
forehead, and his big hands clench themselves unconsciously. He handed
back the letter without a word. M. Carrège was looking with close
attention at his desk, M. Caux's eyes were fixed upon the ceiling, and
M. Hercule Poirot was tenderly brushing a speck of dust from his coat
sleeve. With the greatest tact they none of them looked at Van Aldin.

It was M. Carrège, mindful of his status and his duties, who tackled
the unpleasant subject.

"Perhaps, Monsieur," he murmured, "you are aware by whom--er--this
letter was written?"

"Yes, I know," said Van Aldin heavily.

"Ah?" said the Magistrate inquiringly.

"A scoundrel who calls himself the Comte de la Roche."

There was a pause; then M. Poirot leaned forward, straightened a ruler
on the judge's desk, and addressed the millionaire directly.

"M. Van Aldin, we are all sensible, deeply sensible, of the pain it
must give you to speak of these matters, but believe me, Monsieur, it
is not the time for concealments. If justice is to be done, we must
know everything. If you will reflect a little minute you will realize
the truth of that clearly for yourself."

Van Aldin was silent for a moment or two, then almost reluctantly he
nodded his head in agreement.

"You are quite right, M. Poirot," he said. "Painful as it is, I have no
right to keep anything back."

The Commissary gave a sigh of relief, and the Examining Magistrate
leaned back in his chair and adjusted a pince-nez on his long thin nose.

"Perhaps you will tell us in your own words, M. Van Aldin," he said,
"all that you know of this gentleman."

"It began eleven or twelve years ago--in Paris. My daughter was a young
girl then, full of foolish, romantic notions, like all young girls are.
Unknown to me, she made the acquaintance of this Comte de la Roche. You
have heard of him, perhaps?"

The Commissary and Poirot nodded in assent.

"He calls himself the Comte de la Roche," continued Van Aldin, "but I
doubt if he has any right to the title."

"You would not have found his name in the _Almanach de Gotha_," agreed
the Commissary.

"I discovered as much," said Van Aldin. "The man was a good-looking,
plausible scoundrel, with a fatal fascination for women. Ruth was
infatuated with him, but I soon put a stop to the whole affair. The man
was no better than a common swindler."

"You are quite right," said the Commissary. "The Comte de la Roche is
well known to us. If it were possible, we should have laid him by the
heels before now, but _ma foi!_ it is not easy; the fellow is cunning,
his affairs are always conducted with ladies of high social position.
If he obtains money from them under false pretences or as the fruit
of blackmail, _eh bien!_ naturally they will not prosecute. To look
foolish in the eyes of the world, oh no, that would never do, and he
has an extraordinary power over women."

"That is so," said the millionaire heavily. "Well, as I told you, I
broke the affair up pretty sharply. I told Ruth exactly what he was,
and she had, perforce, to believe me. About a year afterwards, she met
her present husband and married him. As far as I knew, that was the end
of the matter; but only a week ago, I discovered, to my amazement, that
my daughter had resumed her acquaintance with the Comte de la Roche.
She had been meeting him frequently in London and Paris. I remonstrated
with her on her imprudence, for I may tell you gentlemen, that, on my
insistence, she was preparing to bring a suit for divorce against her
husband."

"That is interesting," murmured Poirot softly, his eyes on the ceiling.

Van Aldin looked at him sharply, and then went on.

"I pointed out to her the folly of continuing to see the Comte under
the circumstances. I thought she agreed with me."

The Examining Magistrate coughed delicately.

"But according to this letter--" he began, and then stopped.

Van Aldin's jaw set itself squarely.

"I know. It's no good mincing matters. However unpleasant, we have got
to face facts. It seems clear that Ruth had arranged to go to Paris and
meet de la Roche there. After my warnings to her, however, she must
have written to the Count suggesting a change of rendezvous."

"The Isles d'Or," said the Commissary thoughtfully, "are situated just
opposite Hyères, a remote and idyllic spot."

Van Aldin nodded.

"My God! How could Ruth be such a fool?" he exclaimed bitterly. "All
this talk about writing a book on jewels! Why, he must have been after
the rubies from the first."

"There are some very famous rubies," said Poirot, "originally part of
the Crown jewels of Russia; they are unique in character, and their
value is almost fabulous. There has been a rumour that they have lately
passed into the possession of an American. Are we right in concluding,
Monsieur, that you were the purchaser?"

"Yes," said Van Aldin. "They came into my possession in Paris about ten
days ago."

"Pardon me, Monsieur, but you have been negotiating for their purchase
for some time?"

"A little over two months. Why?"

"These things become known," said Poirot. "There is always a pretty
formidable crowd on the track of jewels such as these."

A spasm distorted the other's face.

"I remember," he said brokenly, "a joke I made to Ruth when I gave them
to her. I told her not to take them to the Riviera with her, as I could
not afford to have her robbed and murdered for the sake of the jewels.
My God! the things one says--never dreaming or knowing they will come
true."

There was a sympathetic silence, and then Poirot spoke in a detached
manner.

"Let us arrange our facts with order and precision. According to our
present theory, this is how they run. The Comte de la Roche knows of
your purchase of these jewels. By an easy stratagem he induces Madame
Kettering to bring the stones with her. He, then, is the man Mason saw
in the train at Paris."

The other three nodded in agreement.

"Madame is surprised to see him, but she deals with the situation
promptly. Mason is got out of the way; a dinner basket is ordered.
We know from the conductor that he made up the berth for the first
compartment, but he did not go into the second compartment, and that
a man could quite well have been concealed from him. So far the Comte
could have been hidden to a marvel. No one knows of his presence on the
train except Madame; he has been careful that the maid did not see his
face. All that she could say is that he was tall and dark. It is all
most conveniently vague. They are alone--and the train rushes through
the night. There would be no outcry, no struggle, for the man is, so
she thinks, her lover."

He turned gently to Van Aldin.

"Death, Monsieur, must have been almost instantaneous. We will pass
over that quickly. The Comte takes the jewel-case which lies ready to
his hand. Shortly afterwards the train draws into Lyons."

M. Carrège nodded his approval.

"Precisely. The conductor without descends. It would be easy for our
man to leave the train unseen; it would be easy to catch a train back
to Paris or anywhere he pleases. And the crime would be put down as an
ordinary train robbery. But for the letter found in Madame's bag, the
Comte would not have been mentioned."

"It was an oversight on his part not to search that bag," declared the
Commissary.

"Without doubt he thought she had destroyed that letter. It was--pardon
me, Monsieur--it was an indiscretion of the first water to keep it."

"And yet," murmured Poirot, "it was an indiscretion the Comte might
have foreseen."

"You mean?"

"I mean we are all agreed on one point, and that is that the Comte de
la Roche knows one subject _à fond_: Women. How was it that, knowing
women as he does, he did not foresee that Madame would have kept that
letter?"

"Yes--yes," said the Examining Magistrate doubtfully, "there is
something in what you say. But at such times, you understand, a man
is not master of himself. He does not reason calmly. _Mon Dieu!_" he
added, with feeling, "if our criminals kept their heads and acted with
intelligence, how should we capture them?"

Poirot smiled to himself.

"It seems to me a clear case," said the other, "but a difficult one
to prove. The Comte is a slippery customer, and unless the maid can
identify him--"

"Which is most unlikely," said Poirot.

"True, true." The Examining Magistrate rubbed his chin. "It is going to
be difficult."

"If he did indeed commit the crime--" began Poirot. M. Caux interrupted.

"If--you say _if_?"

"Yes, Monsieur le Juge, I say _if_."

The other looked at him sharply. "You are right," he said at last, "we
go too fast. It is possible that the Comte may have an alibi. Then we
should look foolish."

"_Ah, ça par exemple_," replied Poirot, "that is of no importance
whatever. Naturally, if he committed the crime he will have an alibi. A
man with the Comte's experience does not neglect to take precautions.
No, I said _if_ for a very different reason."

"And what was that?"

Poirot wagged an emphatic forefinger. "The psychology."

"Eh?" said the Commissary.

"The psychology is at fault. The Comte is a scoundrel--yes. The Comte
is a swindler--yes. The Comte preys upon women--yes. He proposes to
steal Madame's jewels--again yes. Is he the kind of man to commit
murder? I say _no_! A man of the type of the Comte is always a coward;
he takes no risks. He plays the safe, the mean, what the English call
the low-down game; but murder, a hundred times no!" He shook his head
in a dissatisfied manner.

The Examining Magistrate, however, did not seem disposed to agree with
him.

"The day always comes when such gentry lose their heads and go too
far," he observed sagely. "Doubtless that is the case here. Without
wishing to disagree with you, M. Poirot--"

"It was only an opinion," Poirot hastened to explain. "The case is, of
course, in your hands, and you will do what seems fit to you."

"I am satisfied in my own mind that the Comte de la Roche is the man we
need to get hold of," said M. Carrège. "You agree with me, Monsieur le
Commissaire?"

"Perfectly."

"And you, M. Van Aldin?"

"Yes," said the millionaire. "Yes; the man is a thorough-paced villain,
no doubt about it."

"It will be difficult to lay hands on him, I am afraid," said the
Magistrate, "but we will do our best. Telegraphed instructions shall go
out at once."

"Permit me to assist you," said Poirot. "There need be no difficulty."

"Eh?"

The others stared at him. The little man smiled beamingly back at them.

"It is my business to know things," he explained. "The Comte is a man
of intelligence. He is at present at a villa he has leased, the Villa
Marina at Antibes."




                     16. Poirot Discusses the Case


Everybody looked respectfully at Poirot. Undoubtedly the little man had
scored heavily. The Commissary laughed--on a rather hollow note.

"You teach us all our business," he cried. "M. Poirot knows more than
the police."

Poirot gazed complacently at the ceiling, adopting a mock-modest air.

"What will you; it is my little hobby," he murmured, "to know things.
Naturally I have the time to indulge it. I am not overburdened with
affairs."

"Ah!" said the Commissary shaking his head portentously. "As for me--"

He made an exaggerated gesture to represent the cares that lay on his
shoulders.

Poirot turned suddenly to Van Aldin.

"You agree, Monsieur, with this view? You feel certain that the Comte
de la Roche is the murderer?"

"Why, it would seem so--yes, certainly."

Something guarded in the answer made the Examining Magistrate look at
the American curiously. Van Aldin seemed aware of his scrutiny and made
an effort as though to shake off some preoccupation.

"What about my son-in-law?" he asked. "You have acquainted him with the
news? He is in Nice, I understand."

"Certainly, Monsieur." The Commissary hesitated, and then murmured very
discreetly: "You are doubtless aware, M. Van Aldin, that M. Kettering
was also one of the passengers on the Blue Train that night?"

The millionaire nodded.

"Heard it just before I left London," he vouchsafed laconically.

"He tells us," continued the Commissary, "that he had no idea his wife
was travelling on the train."

"I bet he hadn't," said Van Aldin grimly. "It would have been rather a
nasty shock to him if he'd come across her on it."

The three men looked at him questioningly.

"I'm not going to mince matters," said Van Aldin savagely. "No one
knows what my poor girl has had to put up with. Derek Kettering wasn't
alone. He had a lady with him."

"Ah?"

"Mirelle--the dancer."

M. Carrège and the Commissary looked at each other and nodded as though
confirming some previous conversation. M. Carrège leaned back in his
chair, joined his hands, and fixed his eyes on the ceiling.

"Ah!" he murmured again. "One wondered." He coughed. "One has heard
rumours."

"The lady," said M. Caux, "is very notorious."

"And also," murmured Poirot softly, "very expensive."

Van Aldin had gone very red in the face. He leant forward and hit the
table a bang with his fist.

"See here," he cried, "my son-in-law is a damned scoundrel!"

He glared at them, looking from one face to another.

"Oh, I know," he went on. "Good looks and a charming, easy manner.
It took me in once upon a time. I suppose he pretended to be
broken-hearted when you broke the news to him--that is, if he didn't
know it already."

"Oh, it came as a complete surprise to him. He was overwhelmed."

"Darned young hypocrite," said Van Aldin. "Simulated great grief, I
suppose?"

"N--no," said the Commissary cautiously. "I would not quite say
that--eh, M. Carrège?"

The Magistrate brought the tips of his fingers together, and half
closed his eyes.

"Shock, bewilderment, horror--these things, yes," he declared
judicially. "Great sorrow--no--I should not say that."

Hercule Poirot spoke once more.

"Permit me to ask, M. Van Aldin, does M. Kettering benefit by the death
of his wife?"

"He benefits to the tune of a couple of millions," said Van Aldin.

"Dollars?"

"Pounds. I settled that sum on Ruth absolutely on her marriage. She
made no will and leaves no children, so the money will go to her
husband."

"Whom she was on the point of divorcing," murmured Poirot. "Ah,
yes--_précisément_."

The Commissary turned and looked sharply at him.

"Do you mean--" he began.

"I mean nothing," said Poirot. "I arrange the facts, that is all."

Van Aldin stared at him with awakening interest.

The little man rose to his feet.

"I do not think I can be of any further service to you, M. le Juge," he
said politely, bowing to M. Carrège. "You will keep me informed of the
course of events? It will be a kindness."

"But certainly--most certainly."

Van Aldin rose also.

"You don't want me any more at present?"

"No, Monsieur; we have all the information we need for the moment."

"Then I will walk a little way with M. Poirot. That is, if he does not
object?"

"Enchanted, Monsieur," said the little man, with a bow.

Van Aldin lighted a large cigar, having first offered one to Poirot,
who declined it and lit one of his own tiny cigarettes. A man of great
strength of character, Van Aldin already appeared to be his everyday,
normal self once more. After strolling along for a minute or two in
silence, the millionaire spoke:

"I take it, M. Poirot, that you no longer exercise your profession?"

"That is so, Monsieur. I enjoy the world."

"Yet you are assisting the police in this affair?"

"Monsieur, if a doctor walks along the street and an accident happens,
does he say, 'I have retired from my profession, I will continue my
walk,' when there is some one bleeding to death at his feet? If I
had been already in Nice, and the police had sent to me and asked me
to assist them, I should have refused. But this affair, the good God
thrust it upon me."

"You were on the spot," said Van Aldin thoughtfully. "You examined the
compartment, did you not?"

Poirot nodded.

"Doubtless you found things that were, shall we say, suggestive to you?"

"Perhaps," said Poirot.

"I hope you see what I am leading up to?" said Van Aldin. "It seems to
me that the case against this Comte de la Roche is perfectly clear, but
I am not a fool. I have been watching you for this last hour or so, and
I realize that for some reason of your own you don't agree with that
theory?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"I may be wrong."

"So we come to the favour I want to ask you. Will you act in this
matter for me?"

"For you personally?"

"That was my meaning."

Poirot was silent for a moment or two. Then he said:

"You realize what you are asking?"

"I guess so," said Van Aldin.

"Very well," said Poirot. "I accept. But in that case, I must have
frank answers to my questions."

"Why, certainly. That is understood."

Poirot's manner changed. He became suddenly brusque and business-like.

"This question of a divorce," he said. "It was you who advised your
daughter to bring the suit?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"About ten days ago. I had had a letter from her complaining of her
husband's behaviour, and I put it to her very strongly that divorce was
the only remedy."

"In what way did she complain of his behaviour?"

"He was being seen about with a _very_ notorious lady--the one we have
been speaking of--Mirelle."

"The dancer. Ah-ha! And Madame Kettering objected? Was she very devoted
to her husband?"

"I would not say that," said Van Aldin, hesitating a little.

"It was not her heart that suffered, it was her pride--is that what you
would say?"

"Yes, I suppose you might put it like that."

"I gather that the marriage had not been a happy one from the
beginning?"

"Derek Kettering is rotten to the core," said Van Aldin. "He is
incapable of making any woman happy."

"He is, as you say in England, a bad lot. That is right, is it not?"

Van Aldin nodded.

"_Très bien!_ You advise Madame to seek a divorce, she agrees; you
consult your solicitors. When does M. Kettering get news of what is in
the wind?"

"I sent for him myself, and explained the course of action I proposed
to take."

"And what did he say?" murmured Poirot softly.

Van Aldin's face darkened at the remembrance.

"He was infernally impudent."

"Excuse the question, Monsieur, but did he refer to the Comte de la
Roche?"

"Not by name," growled the other unwillingly, "but he showed himself
cognizant of the affair."

"What, if I may ask, was M. Kettering's financial position at the time?"

"How do you suppose I should know that?" asked Van Aldin, after a very
brief hesitation.

"It seemed likely to me that you would inform yourself on that point."

"Well--you are quite right, I did. I discovered that Kettering was on
the rocks."

"And now he has inherited two million pounds! _La vie_--it is a strange
thing, is it not?"

Van Aldin looked at him sharply.

"What do you mean?"

"I moralize," said Poirot. "I reflect, I speak the philosophy. But to
return to where we were. Surely M. Kettering did not propose to allow
himself to be divorced without making a fight for it?"

Van Aldin did not answer for a minute or two, then he said:

"I don't exactly know what his intentions were."

"Did you hold any further communications with him?"

Again a slight pause, then Van Aldin said:

"No."

Poirot stopped dead, took off his hat, and held out his hand.

"I must wish you good-day, Monsieur. I can do nothing for you."

"What are you getting at?" demanded Van Aldin angrily.

"If you do not tell me the truth, I can do nothing."

"I don't know what you mean."

"I think you do. You may rest assured, M. Van Aldin, that I know how to
be discreet."

"Very well, then," said the millionaire. "I'll admit that I was not
speaking the truth just now. I _did_ have further communication with my
son-in-law."

"Yes?"

"To be exact, I sent my secretary, Major Knighton, to see him, with
instructions to offer him the sum of one hundred thousand pounds in
cash if the divorce went through undefended."

"A pretty sum of money," said Poirot appreciatively; "and the answer of
Monsieur your son-in-law?"

"He sent back word that I could go to hell," replied the millionaire
succinctly.

"Ah!" said Poirot.

He betrayed no emotion of any kind. At the moment he was engaged in
methodically recording facts.

"Monsieur Kettering has told the police that he neither saw nor spoke
to his wife on the journey from England. Are you inclined to believe
that statement, Monsieur?"

"Yes, I am," said Van Aldin. "He would take particular pains to keep
out of her way, I should say."

"Why?"

"Because he had got that woman with him."

"Mirelle?"

"Yes."

"How did you come to know that fact?"

"A man of mine, whom I had put on to watch him, reported to me that
they had both left by that train."

"I see," said Poirot. "In that case, as you said before, he would not
be likely to attempt to hold any communication with Madame Kettering."

The little man fell silent for some time. Van Aldin did not interrupt
his meditation.




                     17. An Aristocratic Gentleman


"You have been to the Riviera before, Georges?" said Poirot to his
valet the following morning.

George was an intensely English, rather wooden-faced individual.

"Yes, sir. I was here two years ago when I was in the service of Lord
Edward Frampton."

"And to-day," murmured his master, "you are here with Hercule Poirot.
How one mounts in the world!"

The valet made no reply to this observation. After a suitable pause he
asked:

"The brown lounge suit, sir? The wind is somewhat chilly to-day."

"There is a grease spot on the waistcoat," objected Poirot. "A
_morceau_ of _filet de sole à la Jeannette_ alighted there when I was
lunching at the Ritz last Tuesday."

"There is no spot there now, sir," said George reproachfully. "I have
removed it."

"_Très bien!_" said Poirot. "I am pleased with you, Georges."

"Thank you, sir."

There was a pause, and then Poirot murmured dreamily:

"Supposing, my good Georges, that you had been born in the same social
sphere as your late master, Lord Edward Frampton--that, penniless
yourself, you had married an extremely wealthy wife, but that that wife
proposed to divorce you, with excellent reasons, what would you do
about it?"

"I should endeavour, sir," replied George, "to make her change her
mind."

"By peaceful or by forcible methods?"

George looked shocked.

"You will excuse me, sir," he said, "but a gentleman of the aristocracy
would not behave like a Whitechapel coster. He would not do anything
low."

"Would he not, Georges? I wonder now. Well, perhaps you are right."

There was a knock on the door. George went to it and opened it a
discreet inch or two. A low murmured colloquy went on, and then the
valet returned to Poirot.

"A note, sir."

Poirot took it. It was from M. Caux, the Commissary of Police.

"We are about to interrogate the Comte de la Roche. The Juge
d'Instruction begs that you will be present."

"Quickly, my suit, Georges! I must hasten myself."

A quarter of an hour later, spick and span in his brown suit, Poirot
entered the Examining Magistrate's room. M. Caux was already there, and
both he and M. Carrège greeted Poirot with polite _empressement_.

"The affair is somewhat discouraging," murmured M. Caux.

"It appears that the Comte arrived in Nice the day before the murder."

"If that is true, it will settle your affair nicely for you," responded
Poirot.

M. Carrège cleared his throat.

"We must not accept this alibi without very cautious inquiry," he
declared. He struck the bell upon the table with his hand.

In another minute a tall dark man, exquisitely dressed, with a
somewhat haughty cast of countenance, entered the room. So very
aristocratic-looking was the Count, that it would have seemed
sheer heresy even to whisper that his father had been an obscure
corn-chandler in Nantes--which, as a matter of fact, was the case.
Looking at him, one would have been prepared to swear that innumerable
ancestors of his must have perished by the guillotine in the French
Revolution.

"I am here, gentlemen," said the Count haughtily. "May I ask why you
wish to see me?"

"Pray be seated, Monsieur le Comte," said the Examining Magistrate
politely. "It is the affair of the death of Madame Kettering that we
are investigating."

"The death of Madame Kettering? I do not understand."

"You were--ahem!--acquainted with the lady, I believe, Monsieur le
Comte?"

"Certainly I was acquainted with her. What has that to do with the
matter?"

Sticking an eyeglass in his eye, he looked coldly round the room, his
glance resting longest on Poirot, who was gazing at him with a kind of
simple, innocent admiration which was most pleasing to the Count's
vanity. M. Carrège leaned back in his chair and cleared his throat.

"You do not perhaps know, Monsieur le Comte"--he paused--"that Madame
Kettering was murdered?"

"Murdered? _Mon Dieu_, how terrible!"

The surprise and the sorrow were excellently done--so well done,
indeed, as to seem wholly natural.

"Madame Kettering was strangled between Paris and Lyons," continued M.
Carrège, "and her jewels were stolen."

"It is iniquitous!" cried the Count warmly; "the police should do
something about these train bandits. Nowadays no one is safe."

"In Madame's handbag," continued the Judge, "we found a letter to her
from you. She had, it seemed, arranged to meet you?"

The Count shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands.

"Of what use are concealments," he said frankly. "We are all men of the
world. Privately and between ourselves, I admit the affair."

"You met her in Paris and travelled down with her, I believe?" said M.
Carrège.

"That was the original arrangement, but by Madame's wish it was
changed. I was to meet her at Hyères."

"You did not meet her on the train at the Gare de Lyon on the evening
of the 14th?"

"On the contrary, I arrived in Nice on the morning of that day, so what
you suggest is impossible."

"Quite so, quite so," said M. Carrège. "As a matter of form, you would
perhaps give me an account of your movements during the evening and
night of the 14th."

The Count reflected for a minute.

"I dined in Monte Carlo at the Café de Paris. Afterwards I went to the
Le Sporting. I won a few thousand francs," he shrugged his shoulders.
"I returned home at perhaps one o'clock."

"Pardon me, Monsieur, but how did you return home?"

"In my own two-seater car."

"No one was with you?"

"No one."

"You could produce witnesses in support of this statement?"

"Doubtless many of my friends saw me there that evening. I dined alone."

"Your servant admitted you on your return to your villa?"

"I let myself in with my own latch-key."

"Ah!" murmured the Magistrate.

Again he struck the bell on the table with his hand. The door opened,
and a messenger appeared.

"Bring in the maid, Mason," said M. Carrège.

"Very good, Monsieur le Juge."

Ada Mason was brought in.

"Will you be so good, Mademoiselle, as to look at this gentleman.
To the best of your ability was it he who entered your mistress's
compartment in Paris?"

The woman looked long and searchingly at the Count, who was, Poirot
fancied, rather uneasy under this scrutiny.

"I could not say, sir, I am sure," said Mason at last. "It might be and
again it might not. Seeing as how I only saw his back, it's hard to
say. I rather think it _was_ the gentleman."

"But you are not sure?"

"No--o," said Mason unwillingly; "n--no, I am not sure."

"You have seen this gentleman before in Curzon Street?"

Mason shook her head.

"I should not be likely to see any visitors that come to Curzon
Street," she explained, "unless they were staying in the house."

"Very well, that will do," said the Examining Magistrate sharply.

Evidently he was disappointed.

"One moment," said Poirot. "There is a question I would like to put to
Mademoiselle, if I may?"

"Certainly, M. Poirot--certainly, by all means."

Poirot addressed himself to the maid.

"What happened to the tickets?"

"The tickets, sir?"

"Yes; the tickets from London to Nice. Did you or your mistress have
them?"

"The mistress had her own Pullman ticket, sir; the others were in my
charge."

"What happened to them?"

"I gave them to the conductor on the French train, sir; he said it was
usual. I hope I did right, sir?"

"Oh, quite right, quite right. A mere matter of detail."

Both M. Caux and the Examining Magistrate looked at him curiously.
Mason stood uncertainly for a minute or two, and then the Magistrate
gave her a brief nod of dismissal, and she went out. Poirot scribbled
something on a scrap of paper and handed it across to M. Carrège. The
latter read it and his brow cleared.

"Well, gentlemen," demanded the Count haughtily, "am I to be detained
further?"

"Assuredly not, assuredly not," M. Carrège hastened to say, with a
great deal of amiability. "Everything is now cleared up as regards your
own position in this affair. Naturally, in view of Madame's letter, we
were bound to question you."

The Count rose, picked up his handsome stick from the corner, and, with
rather a curt bow, left the room.

"And that is that," said M. Carrège. "You were quite right, M.
Poirot--much better to let him feel he is not suspected. Two of my men
will shadow him night and day, and at the same time we will go into the
question of the alibi. It seems to me rather--er--a fluid one."

"Possibly," agreed Poirot thoughtfully.

"I asked M. Kettering to come here this morning," continued the
Magistrate, "though really I doubt if we have much to ask him, but
there are one or two suspicious circumstances--" He paused, rubbing his
nose.

"Such as?" asked Poirot.

"Well"--the Magistrate coughed--"this lady with whom he is said to be
travelling--Mademoiselle Mirelle. She is staying at one hotel and he at
another. That strikes me--er--as rather odd."

"It looks," said M. Caux, "as though they were being careful."

"Exactly," said M. Carrège triumphantly; "and what should they have to
be careful about?"

"An excess of caution is suspicious, eh?" said Poirot.

"_Précisément._"

"We might, I think," murmured Poirot, "ask M. Kettering one or two
questions."

The Magistrate gave instructions. A moment or two later, Derek
Kettering, debonair as ever, entered the room.

"Good morning, Monsieur," said the Judge politely.

"Good morning," said Derek Kettering curtly. "You sent for me. Has
anything fresh turned up?"

"Pray sit down, Monsieur."

Derek took a seat and flung his hat and stick on the table.

"Well?" he asked impatiently.

"We have, so far, no fresh data," said M. Carrège cautiously.

"That's very interesting," said Derek drily. "Did you send for me here
in order to tell me that?"

"We naturally thought, Monsieur, that you would like to be informed of
the progress of the case," said the Magistrate severely.

"Even if the progress was non-existent."

"We also wished to ask you a few questions."

"Ask away."

"You are quite sure that you neither saw nor spoke with your wife on
the train?"

"I've answered that already. I did not."

"You had, no doubt, your reasons."

Derek stared at him suspiciously.

"I--did--not--know--she--was--on--the--train," he explained, spacing
his words elaborately, as though to some one dull of intellect.

"That is what you say, yes," murmured M. Carrège. A frown suffused
Derek's face.

"I should like to know what you're driving at. Do you know what I
think, M. Carrège?"

"What do you think, Monsieur?"

"I think the French police are vastly overrated. Surely you must have
some data as to these gangs of train robbers. It's outrageous that
such a thing could happen on a _train de luxe_ like that, and that the
French police should be helpless to deal with the matter."

"We are dealing with it, Monsieur, never fear."

"Madame Kettering, I understand, did not leave a will," interposed
Poirot suddenly. His fingertips were joined together, and he was
looking intently at the ceiling.

"I don't think she ever made one," said Kettering. "Why?"

"It is a very pretty little fortune that you inherit there," said
Poirot--"a very pretty little fortune."

Although his eyes were still on the ceiling, he managed to see the dark
flush that rose to Derek Kettering's face.

"What do you mean, and who are you?"

Poirot gently uncrossed his knees, withdrew his gaze from the ceiling,
and looked the young man full in the face.

"My name is Hercule Poirot," he said quietly, "and I am probably the
greatest detective in the world. You are quite sure that you did not
see or speak to your wife on that train?"

"What are you getting at? Do you--do you mean to insinuate that I--I
killed her?"

He laughed suddenly.

"I mustn't lose my temper; it's too palpably absurd. Why, if I killed
her I should have had no need to steal her jewels, would I?"

"That is true," murmured Poirot, with a rather crestfallen air. "I did
not think of that."

"If ever there were a clear case of murder and robbery, this is it,"
said Derek Kettering. "Poor Ruth, it was those damned rubies did for
her. It must have got about she had them with her. There has been
murder done for those same stones before now, I believe."

Poirot sat up suddenly in his chair. A very faint green light glowed in
his eyes. He looked extraordinarily like a sleek, well-fed cat.

"One more question, M. Kettering," he said. "Will you give me the date
when you last saw your wife?"

"Let me see," Kettering reflected. "It must have been--yes over three
weeks ago. I am afraid I can't give you the date exactly."

"No matter," said Poirot drily; "that is all I wanted to know."

"Well," said Derek Kettering impatiently, "anything further?"

He looked towards M. Carrège. The latter sought inspiration from
Poirot, and received it in a very faint shake of the head.

"No, M. Kettering," he said politely; "no, I do not think we need
trouble you any further. I wish you good morning."

"Good morning," said Kettering. He went out, banging the door behind
him.

Poirot leaned forward and spoke sharply, as soon as the young man was
out of the room.

"Tell me," he said peremptorily, "when did you speak of these rubies to
M. Kettering?"

"I have not spoken of them," said M. Carrège. "It was only yesterday
afternoon that we learnt about them from M. Van Aldin."

"Yes; but there was a mention of them in the Comte's letter."

M. Carrège looked pained.

"Naturally I did not speak of that letter to M. Kettering," he said in
a shocked voice. "It would have been most indiscreet at the present
juncture of affairs."

Poirot leaned forward and tapped the table.

"_Then how did he know about them?_" he demanded softly. "Madame could
not have told him, for he has not seen her for three weeks. It seems
unlikely that either M. Van Aldin or his secretary would have mentioned
them; their interviews with him have been on entirely different lines,
and there has not been any hint or reference to them in the newspapers."

He got up and took his hat and stick.

"And yet," he murmured to himself, "our gentleman knows all about them.
I wonder now, yes, I wonder!"




                           18. Derek Lunches


Derek Kettering went straight to the Negresco, where he ordered a
couple of cocktails and disposed of them rapidly; then he stared
moodily out over the dazzling blue sea. He noted the passers-by
mechanically--a damned dull crowd, badly dressed, and painfully
uninteresting; one hardly ever saw anything worth while nowadays. Then
he corrected this last impression rapidly, as a woman placed herself at
a table a little distance away from him. She was wearing a marvellous
confection of orange and black, with a little hat that shaded her face.
He ordered a third cocktail; again he stared out to sea, and then
suddenly he started. A well-known perfume assailed his nostrils, and he
looked up to see the orange-and-black lady standing beside him. He saw
her face now, and recognized her. It was Mirelle. She was smiling that
insolent, seductive smile he knew so well.

"Dereek!" she murmured. "You are pleased to see me, no?"

She dropped into a seat the other side of the table.

"But welcome me, then, stupid one," she mocked.

"This is an unexpected pleasure," said Derek. "When did you leave
London?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"A day or two ago."

"And the Parthenon?"

"I have, how do you say it?--given them the chuck!"

"Really?"

"You are not very amiable, Dereek."

"Do you expect me to be?"

Mirelle lit a cigarette and puffed at it for a few minutes before
saying:

"You think, perhaps, that it is not prudent so soon?"

Derek stared at her, then he shrugged his shoulders, and remarked
formally:

"You are lunching here?"

"_Mais oui._ I am lunching with you."

"I am extremely sorry," said Derek. "I have a very important
engagement."

"_Mon Dieu!_ But you men are like children," exclaimed the dancer. "But
yes, it is the spoilt child that you act to me ever since that day in
London when you flung yourself out of my flat, you sulk. Ah! _mais
c'est inoui!_"

"My dear girl," said Derek, "I really don't know what you are talking
about. We agreed in London that rats desert a sinking ship, that is all
that there is to be said."

In spite of his careless words, his face looked haggard and strained.
Mirelle leaned forward suddenly.

"You cannot deceive me," she murmured. "I know--I know what you have
done for me."

He looked up at her sharply. Some undercurrent in her voice arrested
his attention. She nodded her head at him.

"Ah! have no fear; I am discreet. You are magnificent! You have a
superb courage, but, all the same, it was I who gave you the idea that
day, when I said to you in London that accidents sometimes happened.
And you are not in danger? The police do not suspect you?"

"What the devil--"

"Hush!"

She held up a slim olive hand with one big emerald on the little finger.

"You are right; I should not have spoken so in a public place. We will
not speak of the matter again, but our troubles are ended; our life
together will be wonderful--wonderful!"

Derek laughed suddenly--a harsh, disagreeable laugh.

"So the rats come back, do they? Two million makes a difference--of
course it does. I ought to have known that." He laughed again. "You
will help me to spend that two million, won't you, Mirelle? You know
how, no woman better." He laughed again.

"Hush!" cried the dancer. "What is the matter with you, Dereek?
See--people are turning to stare at you."

"Me? I will tell you what is the matter. I have finished with you,
Mirelle. Do you hear? Finished!"

Mirelle did not take it as he expected her to do. She looked at him for
a minute or two, and then she smiled softly.

"But what a child! You are angry--you are sore, and all because I am
practical. Did I not always tell you that I adored you?"

She leaned forward.

"But I know you, Dereek. Look at me--see, it is Mirelle who speaks to
you. You cannot live without her, you know it. I loved you before, I
will love you a hundred times more now. I will make life wonderful for
you--but wonderful. There is no one like Mirelle."

Her eyes burned into his. She saw him grow pale and draw in his breath,
and she smiled to herself contentedly. She knew her own magic and power
over men.

"That is settled," she said softly, and gave a little laugh. "And now,
Dereek, will you give me lunch?"

"No."

He drew in his breath sharply and rose to his feet.

"I am sorry, but I told you--I have got an engagement."

"You are lunching with some one else? Bah! I don't believe it."

"I am lunching with that lady over there."

He crossed abruptly to where a lady in white had just come up the
steps. He addressed her a little breathlessly.

"Miss Grey, will you--will you have lunch with me? You met me at Lady
Tamplin's, if you remember."

Katherine looked at him for a minute or two with those thoughtful grey
eyes that said so much.

"Thank you," she said, after a moment's pause; "I should like to very
much."




                       19. An Unexpected Visitor


The Comte de la Roche had just finished _déjeuner_, consisting of an
_omelette fines herbes_, an _entrecôte Béarnaise_, and a _Savarin
au Rhum_. Wiping his fine black moustache delicately with his table
napkin, the Comte rose from the table. He passed through the salon of
the villa, noting with appreciation the few _objets d'art_ which were
carelessly scattered about. The Louis XV snuff-box, the satin shoe
worn by Marie Antoinette, and the other historic trifles were part of
the Comte's _mise en scène_. They were, he would explain to his fair
visitors, heirlooms in his family. Passing through on to the terrace,
the Comte looked out on the Mediterranean with an unseeing eye. He was
in no mood for appreciating the beauties of scenery. A fully matured
scheme had been rudely brought to naught, and his plans had to be cast
afresh. Stretching himself out in a basket chair, a cigarette held
between his white fingers, the Comte pondered deeply.

Presently Hippolyte, his man-servant, brought out coffee and a choice
of liqueurs. The Comte selected some very fine old brandy.

As the man-servant was preparing to depart, the Comte arrested him
with a slight gesture. Hippolyte stood respectfully to attention. His
countenance was hardly a prepossessing one, but the correctitude of his
demeanour went far to obliterate the fact. He was now the picture of
respectful attention.

"It is possible," said the Comte, "that in the course of the next few
days various strangers may come to the house. They will endeavour to
scrape acquaintance with you and with Marie. They will probably ask you
various questions concerning me."

"Yes, Monsieur le Comte."

"Perhaps this has already happened?"

"No, Monsieur le Comte."

"There have been no strangers about the place? You are certain?"

"There has been no one, Monsieur le Comte."

"That is well," said the Comte drily; "nevertheless they will come--I
am sure of it. They will ask questions."

Hippolyte looked at his master in intelligent anticipation.

The Comte spoke slowly, without looking at Hippolyte.

"As you know, I arrived here last Tuesday morning. If the police or any
other inquirer should question you, do not forget that fact. I arrived
on Tuesday, the 14th--not Wednesday, the 15th. You understand?"

"Perfectly, Monsieur le Comte."

"In an affair where a lady is concerned, it is always necessary to be
discreet. I feel certain, Hippolyte, that you can be discreet."

"I can be discreet, Monsieur."

"And Marie?"

"Marie also. I will answer for her."

"That is well then," murmured the Comte.

When Hippolyte had withdrawn, the Comte sipped his black coffee with
a reflective air. Occasionally he frowned, once he shook his head
slightly, twice he nodded it. Into the midst of these cogitations came
Hippolyte once more.

"A lady, Monsieur."

"A lady?"

The Comte was surprised. Not that a visit from a lady was an unusual
thing at the Villa Marina, but at this particular moment the Comte
could not think who the lady was likely to be.

"She is, I think, a lady not known to Monsieur," murmured the valet
helpfully.

The Comte was more and more intrigued.

"Show her out here, Hippolyte," he commanded.

A moment later a marvellous vision in orange and black stepped out on
the terrace, accompanied by a strong perfume of exotic blossoms.

"Monsieur le Comte de la Roche?"

"At your service, Mademoiselle," said the Comte, bowing.

"My name is Mirelle. You may have heard of me."

"Ah, indeed, Mademoiselle, but who has not been enchanted by the
dancing of Mademoiselle Mirelle? Exquisite!"

The dancer acknowledged this compliment with a brief mechanical smile.

"My descent upon you is unceremonious," she began.

"But seat yourself, I beg of you, Mademoiselle," cried the Comte,
bringing forward a chair.

Behind the gallantry of his manner he was observing her narrowly. There
were very few things that the Comte did not know about women. True, his
experience had not lain much in ladies of Mirelle's class, who were
themselves predatory. He and the dancer were, in a sense, birds of a
feather. His arts, the Comte knew, would be thrown away on Mirelle. She
was a Parisienne, and a shrewd one. Nevertheless, there was one thing
that the Comte could recognize infallibly when he saw it. He knew at
once that he was in the presence of a very angry woman, and an angry
woman, as the Comte was well aware, always says more than is prudent,
and is occasionally a source of profit to a level-headed gentleman who
keeps cool.

"It is most amiable of you, Mademoiselle, to honour my poor abode thus."

"We have mutual friends in Paris," said Mirelle. "I have heard of you
from them, but I come to see you to-day for another reason. I have
heard of you since I came to Nice--in a different way, you understand."

"Ah?" said the Comte softly.

"I will be brutal," continued the dancer; "nevertheless, believe that I
have your welfare at heart. They are saying in Nice, Monsieur le Comte,
that you are the murderer of the English lady, Madame Kettering."

"I!--the murderer of Madame Kettering? Bah! But how absurd!"

He spoke more languidly than indignantly, knowing that he would thus
provoke her further.

"But yes," she insisted; "it is as I tell you."

"It amuses people to talk," murmured the Comte indifferently. "It would
be beneath me to take such wild accusations seriously."

"You do not understand." Mirelle bent forward, her dark eyes flashing.
"It is not the idle talk of those in the streets. It is the police."

"The police--ah?"

The Comte sat up, alert once more.

Mirelle nodded her head vigorously several times.

"Yes, yes. You comprehend me--I have friends every where. The Prefect
himself--" She left the sentence unfinished, with an eloquent shrug of
the shoulders.

"Who is not indiscreet where a beautiful woman is concerned?" murmured
the Count politely.

"The police believe that you killed Madame Kettering. But they are
wrong."

"Certainly they are wrong," agreed the Comte easily.

"You say that, but you do not know the truth. I do."

The Comte looked at her curiously.

"You know who killed Madame Kettering? Is that what you would say,
Mademoiselle?"

Mirelle nodded vehemently.

"Yes."

"Who was it?" asked the Comte sharply.

"Her husband." She bent nearer to the Comte, speaking in a low voice
that vibrated with anger and excitement. "It was her husband who killed
her."

The Comte leant back in his chair. His face was a mask.

"Let me ask you, Mademoiselle--how do you know this?"

"How do I know it?" Mirelle sprang to her feet, with a laugh. "He
boasted of it beforehand. He was ruined, bankrupt, dishonoured. Only
the death of his wife could save him. He told me so. He travelled
on the same train--but she was not to know it. Why was that, I ask
you? So that he might creep upon her in the night--Ah!"--she shut her
eyes--"I can see it happening...."

The Count coughed.

"Perhaps--perhaps," he murmured. "But surely, Mademoiselle, in that
case he would not steal the jewels?"

"The jewels!" breathed Mirelle. "The jewels. Ah! Those rubies...."

Her eyes grew misty, a far-away light in them. The Comte looked at her
curiously, wondering for the hundredth time at the magical influence of
precious stones on the female sex. He recalled her to practical matters.

"What do you want me to do, Mademoiselle?"

Mirelle became alert and business-like once more.

"Surely it is simple. You will go to the police. You will say to them
that M. Kettering committed this crime."

"And if they do not believe me? If they ask for proof?" He was eyeing
her closely.

Mirelle laughed softly, and drew her orange-and-black wrap closer round
her.

"Send them to me, Monsieur le Comte," she said softly; "I will give
them the proof they want."

Upon that she was gone, an impetuous whirlwind, her errand accomplished.

The Comte looked after her, his eyebrows delicately raised.

"She is in a fury," he murmured. "What has happened now to upset her?
But she shows her hand too plainly. Does she really believe that Mr.
Kettering killed his wife? She would like me to believe it. She would
even like the police to believe it."

He smiled to himself. He had no intention whatsoever of going to the
police. He saw various other possibilities, to judge by his smile, an
agreeable vista of them.

Presently, however, his brow clouded. According to Mirelle, he was
suspected by the police. That might be true or it might not. An
angry woman of the type of the dancer was not likely to bother about
the strict veracity of her statements. On the other hand, she might
easily have obtained--inside information. In that case--his mouth set
grimly--in that case he must take certain precautions.

He went into the house and questioned Hippolyte closely once more as
to whether any strangers had been to the house. The valet was positive
in his assurances that this was not the case. The Comte went up to
his bedroom and crossed over to an old bureau that stood against the
wall. He let down the lid of this, and his delicate fingers sought for
a spring at the back of one of the pigeon-holes. A secret drawer flew
out; in it was a small brown paper package. The Comte took this out and
weighed it in his hand carefully for a minute or two. Raising his hand
to his head, with a slight grimace he pulled out a single hair. This he
placed on the lip of the drawer and shut it carefully. Still carrying
the small parcel in his hand, he went downstairs and out of the house
to the garage, where stood a scarlet two-seater car. Ten minutes later
he had taken the road for Monte Carlo.

He spent a few hours at the Casino, then sauntered out into the town.
Presently he re-entered the car and drove off in the direction of
Mentone. Earlier in the afternoon he had noticed an inconspicuous grey
car some little distance behind him. He noticed it again now. He smiled
to himself. The road was climbing steadily upwards. The Comte's foot
pressed hard on the accelerator. The little red car had been specially
built to the Comte's design, and had a far more powerful engine than
would have been suspected from its appearance. It shot ahead.

Presently he looked back and smiled; the grey car was following
behind. Smothered in dust, the little red car leaped along the road.
It was travelling now at a dangerous pace, but the Comte was a
first-class driver. Now they were going down hill, twisting and curving
unceasingly. Presently the car slackened speed, and finally came to
a standstill before a Bureau de Poste. The Comte jumped out, lifted
the lid of the tool chest, extracted the small brown paper parcel and
hurried into the post office. Two minutes later he was driving once
more in the direction of Mentone. When the grey car arrived there, the
Comte was drinking English five o'clock tea on the terrace of one of
the hotels.

Later, he drove back to Monte Carlo, dined there, and reached home once
more at eleven o'clock. Hippolyte came out to meet him with a disturbed
face.

"Ah! Monsieur le Comte has arrived. Monsieur le Comte did not telephone
me, by any chance?"

The Comte shook his head.

"And yet at three o'clock I received a summons from Monsieur le Comte,
to present myself to him at Nice, at the Negresco."

"Really," said the Comte; "and you went?"

"Certainly, Monsieur, but at the Negresco they knew nothing of Monsieur
le Comte. He had not been there."

"Ah," said the Comte, "doubtless at that hour Marie was out doing her
afternoon marketing?"

"That is so, Monsieur le Comte."

"Ah, well," said the Comte, "it is of no importance. A mistake."

He went upstairs, smiling to himself.

Once within his own room, he bolted his door and looked sharply round.
Everything seemed as usual. He opened various drawers and cupboards.
Then he nodded to himself. Things had been replaced almost exactly as
he had left them, but not quite. It was evident that a very thorough
search had been made.

He went over to the bureau and pressed the hidden spring. The drawer
flew open, but the hair was no longer where he had placed it. He nodded
his head several times.

"They are excellent, our French police," he murmured to
himself--"excellent. Nothing escapes them."




                     20. Katherine Makes a Friend


On the following morning Katherine and Lenox were sitting on the
terrace of the Villa Marguerite. Something in the nature of a
friendship was springing up between them, despite the difference in
age. But for Lenox, Katherine would have found life at the Villa
Marguerite quite intolerable. The Kettering case was the topic of the
moment. Lady Tamplin frankly exploited her guest's connection with the
affair for all it was worth. The most persistent rebuffs that Katherine
could administer quite failed to pierce Lady Tamplin's self-esteem.
Lenox adopted a detached attitude, seemingly amused at her mother's
manœuvres, and yet with a sympathetic understanding of Katherine's
feelings. The situation was not helped by Chubby, whose naïve delight
was unquenchable, and who introduced Katherine to all and sundry as:

"This is Miss Grey. You know that Blue Train business? She was in it up
to the ears! Had a long talk with Ruth Kettering a few hours before the
murder! Bit of luck for her, eh?"

A few remarks of this kind had provoked Katherine that morning to an
unusually tart rejoinder, and when they were alone together Lenox
observed in her slow drawl:

"Not used to exploitation, are you? You have a lot to learn, Katherine."

"I am sorry I lost my temper. I don't, as a rule."

"It is about time you learnt to blow off steam. Chubby is only an ass;
there is no harm in him. Mother, of course, is trying, but you can
lose your temper with her until Kingdom come, and it won't make any
impression. She will open large, sad blue eyes at you and not care a
bit."

Katherine made no reply to this filial observation, and Lenox presently
went on:

"I am rather like Chubby. I delight in a good murder, and
besides--well, knowing Derek makes a difference."

Katherine nodded.

"So you lunched with him yesterday," pursued Lenox reflectively. "Do
you like him, Katherine?"

Katherine considered for a minute or two.

"I don't know," she said very slowly.

"He is very attractive."

"Yes, he is attractive."

"What don't you like about him?"

Katherine did not reply to the question, or at any rate not directly.
"He spoke of his wife's death," she said. "He said he would not pretend
that it had been anything but a bit of most marvellous luck for him."

"And that shocked you, I suppose," said Lenox. She paused, and then
added in rather a queer tone of voice: "He likes you, Katherine."

"He gave me a very good lunch," said Katherine, smiling.

Lenox refused to be side-tracked.

"I saw it the night he came here," she said thoughtfully. "The way he
looked at you; and you are not his usual type--just the opposite. Well,
I suppose it is like religion--you get it at a certain age."

"Mademoiselle is wanted at the telephone," said Marie, appearing at the
window of the salon. "M. Hercule Poirot desires to speak with her."

"More blood and thunder. Go on, Katherine; go and dally with your
detective."

M. Hercule Poirot's voice came neat and precise in its intonation to
Katherine's ear.

"That is Mademoiselle Grey who speaks? _Bon._ Mademoiselle, I have a
word for you from M. Van Aldin, the father of Madame Kettering. He
wishes very much to speak with you, either at the Villa Marguerite or
at his hotel, whichever you prefer."

Katherine reflected for a moment, but she decided that for Van Aldin
to come to the Villa Marguerite would be both painful and unnecessary.
Lady Tamplin would have hailed his advent with far too much delight.
She never lost a chance of cultivating millionaires. She told Poirot
that she would much rather come to Nice.

"Excellent, Mademoiselle. I will call for you myself in an auto. Shall
we say in about three-quarters of an hour?"

Punctually to the moment Poirot appeared. Katherine was waiting for
him, and they drove off at once.

"Well, Mademoiselle, how goes it?"

She looked at his twinkling eyes, and was confirmed in her first
impression that there was something very attractive about M. Hercule
Poirot.

"This is our own Roman Policier, is it not?" said Poirot. "I made you
the promise that we should study it together. And me, I always keep my
promises."

"You are too kind," murmured Katherine.

"Ah, you mock yourself at me; but do you want to hear the developments
of the case, or do you not?"

Katherine admitted that she did, and Poirot proceeded to sketch for her
a thumbnail portrait of the Comte de la Roche.

"You think he killed her," said Katherine thoughtfully.

"That is the theory," said Poirot guardedly.

"Do you yourself believe that?"

"I did not say so. And you, Mademoiselle, what do you think?"

Katherine shook her head.

"How should I know? I don't know anything about those things, but I
should say that--"

"Yes," said Poirot encouragingly.

"Well--from what you say the Count does not sound the kind of man who
would actually kill anybody."

"Ah! Very good," cried Poirot, "you agree with me; that is just what I
have said." He looked at her sharply. "But tell me, you have met Mr.
Derek Kettering?"

"I met him at Lady Tamplin's, and I lunched with him yesterday."

"A _mauvais sujet_," said Poirot, shaking his head; "but _les
femmes_--they like that, eh?"

He twinkled at Katherine and she laughed.

"He is the kind of man one would notice anywhere," continued Poirot.
"Doubtless you observed him on the Blue Train?"

"Yes, I noticed him."

"In the restaurant car?"

"No. I didn't notice him at meals at all. I only saw him once--going
into his wife's compartment."

Poirot nodded. "A strange business," he murmured. "I believe you said
you were awake, Mademoiselle, and looked out of your window at Lyons?
You saw no tall dark man such as the Comte de la Roche leave the train?"

Katherine shook her head. "I don't think I saw any one at all," she
said. "There was a youngish lad in a cap and overcoat who got out, but
I don't think he was leaving the train, only walking up and down the
platform. There was a fat Frenchman with a beard, in pyjamas and an
overcoat, who wanted a cup of coffee. Otherwise, I think there were
only the train attendants."

Poirot nodded his head several times. "It is like this, you see," he
confided, "the Comte de la Roche has an alibi. An alibi, it is a very
pestilential thing, and always open to the gravest suspicion. But here
we are!"

They went straight up to Van Aldin's suite, where they found Knighton.
Poirot introduced him to Katherine. After a few commonplaces had been
exchanged, Knighton said, "I will tell Mr. Van Aldin that Miss Grey is
here."

He went through a second door into an adjoining room. There was a low
murmur of voices, and then Van Aldin came into the room and advanced
towards Katherine with outstretched hand, giving her at the same time a
shrewd and penetrating glance.

"I am pleased to meet you, Miss Grey," he said simply. "I have been
wanting very badly to hear what you can tell me about Ruth."

The quiet simplicity of the millionaire's manner appealed to Katherine
strongly. She felt herself in the presence of a very genuine grief, the
more real for its absence of outward sign.

He drew forward a chair.

"Sit here, will you, and just tell me all about it."

Poirot and Knighton retired discreetly into the other room, and
Katherine and Van Aldin were left alone together. She found no
difficulty in her task. Quite simply and naturally she related her
conversation with Ruth Kettering, word for word as nearly as she
could. He listened in silence, leaning back in his chair, with one hand
shading his eyes. When she had finished he said quietly:

"Thank you, my dear."

They both sat silent for a minute or two. Katherine felt that words of
sympathy would be out of place. When the millionaire spoke, it was in a
different tone:

"I am very grateful to you, Miss Grey. I think you did something to
ease my poor Ruth's mind in the last hours of her life. Now I want
to ask you something. You know--M. Poirot will have told you--about
the scoundrel that my poor girl had got herself mixed up with. He was
the man of whom she spoke to you--the man she was going to meet. In
your judgment do you think she might have changed her mind after her
conversation with you? Do you think she meant to go back on her word?"

"I can't honestly tell you. She had certainly come to some decision,
and seemed more cheerful in consequence of it."

"She gave you no idea where she intended to meet the skunk--whether in
Paris or at Hyères?"

Katherine shook her head.

"She said nothing as to that."

"Ah!" said Van Aldin thoughtfully, "and that is the important point.
Well, time will show."

He got up and opened the door of the adjoining room. Poirot and
Knighton came back.

Katherine declined the millionaire's invitation to lunch, and Knighton
went down with her and saw her into the waiting car. He returned to
find Poirot and Van Aldin deep in conversation.

"If we only knew," said the millionaire thoughtfully, "what decision
Ruth came to. It might have been any of half a dozen. She might have
meant to leave the train at Paris and cable to me. She may have meant
to have gone on to the south of France and have an explanation with the
Count there. We are in the dark--absolutely in the dark. But we have
the maid's word for it that she was both startled and dismayed at the
Count's appearance at the station in Paris. That was clearly not part
of the preconceived plan. You agree with me, Knighton?"

The secretary started. "I beg your pardon, Mr. Van Aldin. I was not
listening."

"Day-dreaming, eh?" said Van Aldin. "That's not like you. I believe
that girl has bowled you over."

Knighton blushed.

"She is a remarkably nice girl," said Van Aldin thoughtfully, "very
nice. Did you happen to notice her eyes?"

"Any man," said Knighton, "would be bound to notice her eyes."




                           21. At the Tennis


Several days had elapsed. Katherine had been for a walk by herself one
morning, and came back to find Lenox grinning at her expectantly.

"Your young man has been ringing you up, Katherine!"

"Who do you call my young man?"

"A new one--Rufus Van Aldin's secretary. You seem to have made rather
an impression there. You are becoming a serious breaker of hearts,
Katherine. First Derek Kettering, and now this young Knighton. The
funny thing is, that I remember him quite well. He was in Mother's War
Hospital that she ran out here. I was only a kid of about eight at the
time."

"Was he badly wounded?"

"Shot in the leg, if I remember rightly--rather a nasty business. I
think the doctors messed it up a bit. They said he wouldn't limp or
anything, but when he left here he was still completely dot and go one."

Lady Tamplin came out and joined them.

"Have you been telling Katherine about Major Knighton?" she asked.
"Such a dear fellow! Just at first I didn't remember him--one had so
many--but now it all comes back."

"He was a bit too unimportant to be remembered before," said Lenox.
"Now that he is a secretary to an American millionaire, it is a very
different matter."

"Darling!" said Lady Tamplin in her vague reproachful voice.

"What did Major Knighton ring up about?" inquired Katherine.

"He asked if you would like to go to the tennis this afternoon. If so,
he would call for you in a car. Mother and I accepted for you with
_empressement_. Whilst you dally with a millionaire's secretary, you
might give me a chance with the millionaire, Katherine. He is about
sixty, I suppose, so that he will be looking about for a nice sweet
young thing like me."

"I should like to meet Mr. Van Aldin," said Lady Tamplin earnestly;
"one has heard so much of him. Those fine rugged figures of the Western
world"--she broke off--"so fascinating," she murmured.

"Major Knighton was very particular to say it was Mr. Van Aldin's
invitation," said Lenox. "He said it so often that I began to smell a
rat. You and Knighton would make a very nice pair, Katherine. Bless
you, my children!"

Katherine laughed, and went upstairs to change her clothes.

Knighton arrived soon after lunch and endured manfully Lady Tamplin's
transports of recognition.

When they were driving together towards Cannes he remarked to
Katherine: "Lady Tamplin has changed wonderfully little."

"In manner or appearance?"

"Both. She must be, I suppose, well over forty, but she is a remarkably
beautiful woman still."

"She is," agreed Katherine.

"I am very glad that you could come to-day," went on Knighton. "M.
Poirot is going to be there also. What an extraordinary little man he
is. Do you know him well, Miss Grey?"

Katherine shook her head. "I met him on the train on the way here. I
was reading a detective novel, and I happened to say something about
such things not happening in real life. Of course, I had no idea of who
he was."

"He is a very remarkable person," said Knighton slowly, "and has done
some very remarkable things. He has a kind of genius for going to the
root of the matter, and right up to the end no one has any idea of
what he is really thinking. I remember I was staying at a house in
Yorkshire, and Lady Clanravon's jewels were stolen. It seemed at first
to be a simple robbery, but it completely baffled the local police. I
wanted them to call in Hercule Poirot, and said he was the only man who
could help them, but they pinned their faith to Scotland Yard."

"And what happened?" said Katherine curiously.

"The jewels were never recovered," said Knighton drily.

"You really do believe in him?"

"I do indeed. The Comte de la Roche is a pretty wily customer. He
has wriggled out of most things. But I think he has met his match in
Hercule Poirot."

"The Comte de la Roche," said Katherine thoughtfully; "so you really
think he did it?"

"Of course." Knighton looked at her in astonishment. "Don't you?"

"Oh yes," said Katherine hastily; "that is, I mean, if it was not just
an ordinary train robbery."

"It might be, of course," agreed the other, "but it seems to me that
the Comte de la Roche fits into this business particularly well."

"And yet he has an alibi."

"Oh, alibis!" Knighton laughed, his face broke into his attractive
boyish smile.

"You confess that you read detective stories, Miss Grey. You must know
that any one who has a perfect alibi is always open to grave suspicion."

"Do you think that real life is like that?" asked Katherine, smiling.

"Why not? Fiction is founded on fact."

"But is rather superior to it," suggested Katherine.

"Perhaps. Anyway, if I was a criminal I should not like to have Hercule
Poirot on my track."

"No more should I," said Katherine, and laughed.

They were met on arrival by Poirot. As the day was warm he was attired
in a white duck suit, with a white camellia in his buttonhole.

"_Bon jour_, Mademoiselle," said Poirot. "I look very English, do I
not?"

"You look wonderful," said Katherine tactfully.

"You mock yourself at me," said Poirot genially, "but no matter. Papa
Poirot, he always laughs the last."

"Where is Mr. Van Aldin?" asked Knighton.

"He will meet us at our seats. To tell you the truth, my friend, he
is not too well pleased with me. Oh, those Americans--the repose, the
calm, they know it not! Mr. Van Aldin, he would that I fly myself in
the pursuit of criminals through all the byways of Nice."

"I should have thought myself that it would not have been a bad plan,"
observed Knighton.

"You are wrong," said Poirot; "in these matters one needs not energy
but finesse. At the tennis one meets every one. That is so important.
Ah, there is Mr. Kettering."

Derek came abruptly up to them. He looked reckless and angry, as though
something had arisen to upset him. He and Knighton greeted each other
with some frigidity. Poirot alone seemed unconscious of any sense of
strain, and chatted pleasantly in a laudable attempt to put every one
at his ease. He paid little compliments.

"It is amazing, M. Kettering, how well you speak the French," he
observed--"so well that you could be taken for a Frenchman if you
chose. That is a very rare accomplishment among Englishmen."

"I wish I did," said Katherine. "I am only too well aware that my
French is of a painfully British order."

They reached their seats and sat down, and almost immediately Knighton
perceived his employer signaling to him from the other end of the
court, and went off to speak to him.

"Me, I approve of that young man," said Poirot, sending a beaming smile
after the departing secretary; "and you, Mademoiselle?"

"I like him very much."

"And you, M. Kettering?"

Some quick rejoinder was springing to Derek's lips, but he checked it
as though something in the little Belgian's twinkling eyes had made him
suddenly alert. He spoke carefully, choosing his words.

"Knighton is a very good fellow," he said.

Just for a moment Katherine fancied that Poirot looked disappointed.

"He is a great admirer of yours, M. Poirot," she said, and she related
some of the things that Knighton had said. It amused her to see the
little man plume himself like a bird, thrusting out his chest, and
assuming an air of mock modesty that would have deceived no one.

"That reminds me, Mademoiselle," he said suddenly, "I have a little
matter of business I have to speak to you about. When you were sitting
talking to that poor lady in the train, I think you must have dropped a
cigarette case."

Katherine looked rather astonished. "I don't think so," she said.
Poirot drew from his pocket a cigarette case of soft blue leather, with
the initial "K" on it in gold.

"No, that is not mine," Katherine said.

"Ah, a thousand apologies. It was doubtless Madame's own. 'K,' of
course, stands for Kettering. We were doubtful, because she had another
cigarette case in her bag, and it seemed odd that she should have two."
He turned to Derek suddenly. "You do not know, I suppose, whether this
was your wife's case or not?"

Derek seemed momentarily taken aback. He stammered a little in his
reply: "I--I don't know. I suppose so."

"It is not yours by any chance?"

"Certainly not. If it were mine it would hardly have been in my wife's
possession."

Poirot looked more ingenuous and childlike than ever.

"I thought perhaps you might have dropped it when you were in your
wife's compartment," he explained guilelessly.

"I never was there. I have already told the police that a dozen times."

"A thousand pardons," said Poirot, with his most apologetic air. "It
was Mademoiselle here who mentioned having seen you going in."

He stopped with an air of embarrassment.

Katherine looked at Derek. His face had gone rather white, but perhaps
that was her fancy. His laugh, when it came, was natural enough.

"You made a mistake, Miss Grey," he said easily. "From what the police
have told me, I gather that my own compartment was only a door or two
away from that of my wife's--though I never suspected the fact at the
time. You must have seen me going into my own compartment." He got up
quickly as he saw Van Aldin and Knighton approaching.

"I'm going to leave you now," he announced. "I can't stand my
father-in-law at any price."

Van Aldin greeted Katherine very courteously, but was clearly in a bad
humour.

"You seem fond of watching tennis, M. Poirot," he growled.

"It is a pleasure to me, yes," cried Poirot placidly.

"It is as well you are in France," said Van Aldin. "We are made of
sterner stuff in the States. Business comes before pleasure there."

Poirot did not take offence; indeed, he smiled gently and confidingly
at the irate millionaire.

"Do not enrage yourself, I beg of you. Every one has his own methods.
Me, I have always found it a delightful and pleasing idea to combine
business and pleasure together."

He glanced at the other two. They were deep in conversation, absorbed
in each other. Poirot nodded his head in satisfaction, and then leant
towards the millionaire, lowering his voice as he did so.

"It is not only for pleasure that I am here, M. Van Aldin. Observe just
opposite us that tall old man--the one with the yellow face and the
venerable beard."

"Well, what of him?"

"That," Poirot said, "is M. Papopolous."

"A Greek, eh?"

"As you say--a Greek. He is a dealer in antiques of world-wide
reputation. He has a small shop in Paris, and he is suspected by the
police of being something more."

"What?"

"A receiver of stolen goods, especially jewels. There is nothing as to
the re-cutting and re-setting of gems that he does not know. He deals
with the highest in Europe and with the lowest of the riff-raff of the
underworld."

Van Aldin was looking at Poirot with suddenly awakened attention.

"Well?" he demanded, a new note in his voice.

"I ask myself," said Poirot, "I, Hercule Poirot"--he thumped himself
dramatically on the chest--"ask myself _why is M. Papopolous suddenly
come to Nice?_"

Van Aldin was impressed. For a moment he had doubted Poirot and
suspected the little man of being past his job, a _poseur_ only. Now,
in a moment, he switched back to his original opinion. He looked
straight at the little detective.

"I must apologize to you, M. Poirot."

Poirot waved the apology aside with an extravagant gesture.

"Bah!" he cried, "all that is of no importance. Now listen, M. Van
Aldin; I have news for you."

The millionaire looked sharply at him, all his interest aroused.

Poirot nodded.

"It is as I say. You will be interested. As you know, M. Van Aldin, the
Comte de la Roche has been under surveillance ever since his interview
with the Juge d'Instruction. The day after that, during his absence,
the Villa Marina was searched by the police."

"Well," said Van Aldin, "did they find anything? I bet they didn't."

Poirot made him a little bow.

"Your acumen is not at fault, M. Van Aldin. They found nothing of an
incriminating nature. It was not to be expected that they would. The
Comte de la Roche, as your expressive idiom has it, was not born on
the preceding day. He is an astute gentleman with great experience."

"Well, go on," growled Van Aldin.

"It may be, of course, that the Comte had nothing of a compromising
nature to conceal. But we must not neglect the possibility. If, then,
he has something to conceal, where is it? Not in his house--the police
searched thoroughly. Not on his person, for he knows that he is liable
to arrest at any minute. There remains--his car. As I say, he was under
surveillance. He was followed on that day to Monte Carlo. From there he
went by road to Mentone, driving himself. His car is a very powerful
one, it outdistanced his pursuers, and for about a quarter of an hour
they completely lost sight of him."

"And during that time you think he concealed something by the
roadside?" asked Van Aldin, keenly interested.

"By the roadside, no. _Ça n'est pas pratique._ But listen now--me, I
have made a little suggestion to M. Carrège. He is graciously pleased
to approve of it. In each Bureau de Poste in the neighbourhood it has
been seen to that there is some one who knows the Comte de la Roche by
sight. Because, you see, Monsieur, the best way of hiding a thing is by
sending it away by the post."

"Well?" demanded Van Aldin; his face was keenly alight with interest
and expectation.

"Well--_voilà!_" With a dramatic flourish Poirot drew out from his
pocket a loosely wrapped brown paper package from which the string had
been removed.

"During that quarter of an hour's interval, our good gentleman mailed
this."

"The address?" asked the other sharply.

Poirot nodded his head.

"Might have told us something, but unfortunately it does not. The
package was addressed to one of these little newspaper shops in Paris
where letters and parcels are kept until called for on payment of a
small commission."

"Yes, but what is inside?" demanded Van Aldin impatiently.

Poirot unwrapped the brown paper and disclosed a square cardboard box.
He looked round him.

"It is a good moment," he said quietly. "All eyes are on the tennis.
Look, Monsieur!"

He lifted the lid of the box for the fraction of a second. An
exclamation of utter astonishment came from the millionaire. His face
turned as white as chalk.

"My God!" he breathed, "the rubies."

He sat for a minute as though dazed. Poirot restored the box to his
pocket and beamed placidly. Then suddenly the millionaire seemed to
come out of his trance; he leaned across to Poirot and wrung his hand
so heartily that the little man winced with pain.

"This is great," said Van Aldin. "Great! You are the goods, M. Poirot.
Once and for all, you are the goods."

"It is nothing," said Poirot modestly. "Order, method, being prepared
for eventualities beforehand--that is all there is to it."

"And now, I suppose, the Comte de la Roche has been arrested?"
continued Van Aldin eagerly.

"No," said Poirot.

A look of utter astonishment came over Van Aldin's face.

"But why? What more do you want?"

"The Comte's alibi is still unshaken."

"But that is nonsense."

"Yes," said Poirot; "I rather think it is nonsense, but unfortunately
we have to prove it so."

"In the meantime he will slip through your fingers."

Poirot shook his head very energetically.

"No," he said, "he will not do that. The one thing the Comte cannot
afford to sacrifice is his social position. At all costs he must stop
and brazen it out."

Van Aldin was still dissatisfied.

"But I don't see--"

Poirot raised a hand. "Grant me a little moment, Monsieur. Me, I have a
little idea. Many people have mocked themselves at the little ideas of
Hercule Poirot--and they have been wrong."

"Well," said Van Aldin, "go ahead. What is this little idea?"

Poirot paused for a moment and then he said:

"I will call upon you at your hotel at eleven o'clock to-morrow
morning. Until then, say nothing to any one."




                     22. M. Papopolous Breakfasts


M. Papopolous was at breakfast. Opposite him sat his daughter, Zia.

There was a knock at the sitting-room door, and a chasseur entered with
a card which he brought to Mr. Papopolous. The latter scrutinized it,
raised his eyebrows, and passed it over to his daughter.

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous, scratching his left ear thoughtfully,
"Hercule Poirot. I wonder now."

Father and daughter looked at each other.

"I saw him yesterday at the tennis," said M. Papopolous. "Zia, I hardly
like this."

"He was very useful to you once," his daughter reminded him.

"That is true," acknowledged M. Papopolous; "also he has retired from
active work, so I hear."

These interchanges between father and daughter had passed in their own
language. Now M. Papopolous turned to the chasseur and said in French:

"_Faites monter ce monsieur._"

A few minutes later Hercule Poirot, exquisitely attired, and swinging a
cane with a jaunty air, entered the room.

"My dear M. Papopolous."

"My dear M. Poirot."

"And Mademoiselle Zia." Poirot swept her a low bow.

"You will excuse us going on with our breakfast," said M. Papopolous,
pouring himself out another cup of coffee. "Your call is--ahem!--a
little early."

"It is scandalous," said Poirot, "but see you, I am pressed."

"Ah!" murmured M. Papopolous, "you are on an affair then?"

"A very serious affair," said Poirot: "the death of Madame Kettering."

"Let me see," M. Papopolous looked innocently up at the ceiling, "that
was the lady who died on the Blue Train, was it not? I saw a mention of
it in the papers, but there was no suggestion of foul play."

"In the interests of justice," said Poirot, "it was thought best to
suppress that fact."

There was a pause.

"And in what way can I assist you, M. Poirot?" asked the dealer
politely.

"_Voilà_," said Poirot, "I shall come to the point." He took from his
pocket the same box that he had displayed at Cannes, and opening it, he
took out the rubies and pushed them across the table to Papopolous.

Although Poirot was watching him narrowly, not a muscle of the old
man's face moved. He took up the jewels and examined them with a
kind of detached interest, then he looked across at the detective
inquiringly:

"Superb, are they not?" asked Poirot.

"Quite excellent," said M. Papopolous.

"How much should you say they are worth?"

The Greek's face quivered a little.

"Is it really necessary to tell you, M. Poirot?" he asked.

"You are shrewd, M. Papopolous. No, it is not. They are not, for
instance, worth five hundred thousand dollars."

Papopolous laughed, and Poirot joined with him.

"As an imitation," said Papopolous, handing them back to Poirot, "they
are, as I said, quite excellent. Would it be indiscreet to ask, M.
Poirot, where you came across them?"

"Not at all," said Poirot; "I have no objection to telling an old
friend like yourself. They were in the possession of the Comte de la
Roche."

M. Papopolous' eyebrows lifted themselves eloquently.

"In-deed," he murmured.

Poirot leant forward and assumed his most innocent and beguiling air.

"M. Papopolous," he said, "I am going to lay my cards upon the table.
The original of these jewels was stolen from Madame Kettering on the
Blue Train. Now I will say to you first this: _I am not concerned with
the recovery of these jewels. That is the affair of the police._ I am
working not for the police but for M. Van Aldin. I want to lay hands on
the man who killed Madame Kettering. I am interested in the jewels only
in so far as they may lead me to the man. You understand?"

The last two words were uttered with great significance. M. Papopolous,
his face quite unmoved, said quietly:

"Go on."

"It seems to me probable, Monsieur, that the jewels will change hands
in Nice--may already have done so."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous.

He sipped his coffee reflectively, and looked a shade more noble and
patriarchal than usual.

"I say to myself," continued Poirot, with animation, "what good
fortune! My old friend, M. Papopolous, is in Nice. He will aid me."

"And how do you think I can aid you?" inquired M. Papopolous coldly.

"I said to myself, without doubt M. Papopolous is in Nice on business."

"Not at all," said M. Papopolous, "I am here for my health--by the
doctor's orders."

He coughed hollowly.

"I am desolated to hear it," replied Poirot, with somewhat insincere
sympathy. "But to continue. When a Russian Grand Duke, an Austrian
Archduchess, or an Italian Prince wish to dispose of their family
jewels--to whom do they go? To M. Papopolous, is it not? He who is
famous all over the world for the discretion with which he arranges
these things."

The other bowed.

"You flatter me."

"It is a great thing, discretion," mused Poirot, and was rewarded by
the fleeting smile which passed across the Greek's face. "I, too, can
be discreet."

The eyes of the two men met.

Then Poirot went on speaking very slowly, and obviously picking his
words with care.

"I say to myself, this: if these jewels have changed hands in Nice, M.
Papopolous would have heard of it. He has knowledge of all that passes
in the jewel world."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous, and helped himself to a _croissant_.

"The police, you understand," said M. Poirot, "do not enter into the
matter. It is a personal affair."

"One hears rumours," admitted M. Papopolous cautiously.

"Such as?" prompted Poirot.

"Is there any reason why I should pass them on?"

"Yes," said Poirot, "I think there is. You may remember, M. Papopolous,
that seventeen years ago there was a certain article in your hands,
left there as security by a very--er--Prominent Person. It was in your
keeping and it unaccountably disappeared. You were, if I may use the
English expression, in the soup."

His eyes came gently round to the girl. She had pushed her cup and
plate aside, and with both elbows on the table and her chin resting on
her hands was listening eagerly. Still keeping an eye on her he went on:

"I am in Paris at the time. You send for me. You place yourself in my
hands. If I restore to you that--article, you say I shall earn your
undying gratitude. _Eh bien!_ I did restore it to you."

A long sigh came from M. Papopolous.

"It was the most unpleasant moment of my career," he murmured.

"Seventeen years is a long time," said Poirot thoughtfully, "but I
believe that I am right in saying, Monsieur, that your race does not
forget."

"A Greek?" murmured Papopolous, with an ironical smile.

"It was not as a Greek I meant," said Poirot.

There was a silence, and then the old man drew himself up proudly.

"You are right, M. Poirot," he said quietly. "I am a Jew. And, as you
say, our race does not forget."

"You will aid me then?"

"As regards the jewels, Monsieur, I can do nothing."

The old man, as Poirot had done just now, picked his words carefully.

"I know nothing. I have heard nothing. But I can perhaps do you a good
turn--that is, if you are interested in racing."

"Under certain circumstances I might be," said Poirot, eyeing him
steadily.

"There is a horse running at Longchamps that would, I think, repay
attention. I cannot say for certain, you understand; this news passed
through so many hands."

He stopped, fixing Poirot with his eye, as though to make sure that the
latter was comprehending him.

"Perfectly, perfectly," said Poirot, nodding.

"The name of the horse," said M. Papopolous, leaning back and joining
the tips of his fingers together, "is the Marquis. I think, but I am
not sure, that it is an English horse, eh, Zia?"

"I think so too," said the girl.

Poirot got up briskly.

"I thank you, Monsieur," he said. "It is a great thing to have what
the English call a tip from the stable. Au revoir, Monsieur, and many
thanks."

He turned to the girl.

"Au revoir, Mademoiselle Zia. It seems to me but yesterday that I saw
you in Paris. One would say that two years had passed at most."

"There is a difference between sixteen and thirty-three," said Zia
ruefully.

"Not in your case," declared Poirot gallantly. "You and your father
will perhaps dine with me one night."

"We shall be delighted," replied Zia.

"Then we will arrange it," declared Poirot, "and now--_je me sauve_."

Poirot walked along the street humming a little tune to himself. He
twirled his stick with a jaunty air, once or twice he smiled to himself
quietly. He turned into the first Bureau de Poste he came to and sent
off a telegram. He took some time in wording it, but it was in code and
he had to call upon his memory. It purported to deal with a missing
scarf-pin, and was addressed to Inspector Japp, Scotland Yard.

Decoded, it was short and to the point. "_Wire me everything known
about man whose soubriquet is the Marquis._"




                           23. A New Theory


It was exactly eleven o'clock when Poirot presented himself at Van
Aldin's hotel. He found the millionaire alone.

"You are punctual, M. Poirot," he said, with a smile, as he rose to
greet the detective.

"I am always punctual," said Poirot. "The exactitude--always do I
observe it. Without order and method--"

He broke off. "Ah, but it is possible that I have said these things to
you before. Let us come at once to the object of my visit."

"Your little idea?"

"Yes, my little idea." Poirot smiled.

"First of all, Monsieur. I should like to interview once more the maid,
Ada Mason. She is here?"

"Yes, she's here."

"Ah!"

Van Aldin looked at him curiously. He rang the bell, and a messenger
was dispatched to find Mason.

Poirot greeted her with his usual politeness, which was never without
effect on that particular class.

"Good afternoon, Mademoiselle," he said cheerfully. "Be seated, will
you not, if Monsieur permits."

"Yes, yes, sit down, my girl," said Van Aldin.

"Thank you, sir," said Mason primly, and she sat down on the extreme
edge of a chair. She looked bonier and more acid than ever.

"I have come to ask you yet more questions," said Poirot. "We must get
to the bottom of this affair. Always I return to the question of the
man in the train. You have been shown the Comte de la Roche. You say
that it is possible he was the man, but you are not sure."

"As I told you, sir, I never saw the gentleman's face. That is what
makes it so difficult."

Poirot beamed and nodded.

"Precisely, exactly. I comprehend well the difficulty. Now,
Mademoiselle, you have been in the service of Madame Kettering two
months, you say. During that time, how often did you see your master?"

Mason reflected a minute or two, and then said:

"Only twice, sir."

"And was that near to, or far away?"

"Well once, sir, he came to Curzon Street. I was upstairs, and I looked
over the banisters and saw him in the hall below. I was a bit curious
like, you understand, knowing the way things--er--were." Mason finished
up with her discreet cough.

"And the other time?"

"I was in the Park, sir, with Annie--one of the housemaids, sir, and
she pointed out the master to me walking with a foreign lady."

Again Poirot nodded.

"Now listen, Mason, this man whom you saw in the carriage talking to
your mistress at the Gare de Lyon, how do you know it was not your
master?"

"The master, sir? Oh, I don't think it could have been."

"But you are not sure," Poirot persisted.

"Well--I never thought of it, sir."

Mason was clearly upset at the idea.

"You have heard that your master was also on the train. What more
natural than that it should be he who came along the corridor."

"But the gentleman who was talking to the mistress must have come from
outside, sir. He was dressed for the street. In an overcoat and soft
hat."

"Just so, Mademoiselle, but reflect a minute. The train has just
arrived at the Gare de Lyon. Many of the passengers promenade
themselves upon the quay. Your mistress was about to do so, and for
that purpose had doubtless put on her fur coat, eh?"

"Yes, sir," agreed Mason.

"Your master, then, does the same. The train is heated, but outside
in the station it is cold. He puts on his overcoat and his hat and he
walks along beside the train, and looking up at the lighted windows
he suddenly sees Madame Kettering. Until then he has had no idea that
she was on the train. Naturally, he mounts the carriage and goes to
her compartment. She gives an exclamation of surprise at seeing him
and quickly shuts the door between the two compartments since it is
possible that their conversation may be of a private nature."

He leaned back in his chair and watched the suggestion slowly take
effect. No one knew better than Hercule Poirot that the class to which
Mason belongs cannot be hurried. He must give her time to get rid of
her own preconceived ideas. At the end of three minutes she spoke:

"Well, of course, sir, it might be so. I never thought of it that way.
The master is tall and dark, and just about that build. It was seeing
the hat and coat that made me say it was a gentleman from outside. Yes,
it might have been the master. I would not like to say either way, I am
sure."

"Thank you very much, Mademoiselle. I shall not require you any
further. Ah, just one thing more." He took from his pocket the
cigarette case he had already shown to Katherine. "Is that your
mistress's case?" he said to Mason.

"No, sir, it is not the mistress's--at least--"

She looked suddenly startled. An idea was clearly working its way to
the forefront of her mind.

"Yes," said Poirot encouragingly.

"I think, sir--I can't be sure, but I think--it is a case that the
mistress bought to give to the master."

"Ah," said Poirot in a non-committal manner.

"But whether she ever did give it to him or not, I can't say, of
course."

"Precisely," said Poirot, "precisely. That is all, I think,
Mademoiselle. I wish you good afternoon."

Ada Mason retired discreetly, closing the door noiselessly behind her.

Poirot looked across at Van Aldin, a faint smile upon his face. The
millionaire looked thunderstruck.

"You think--you think it was Derek?" he queried, "but--everything
points the other way. Why, the Count has actually been caught redhanded
with the jewels on him."

"No."

"But you told me--"

"What did I tell you?"

"That story about the jewels. You showed them to me."

"No."

Van Aldin stared at him.

"You mean to say you didn't show them to me."

"No."

"Yesterday--at the tennis?"

"No."

"Are you crazy, M. Poirot, or am I?"

"Neither of us is crazy," said the detective. "You ask me a question;
I answer it. You say have I not shown you the jewels yesterday?
I reply--no. What I showed you, M. Van Aldin, was a first-class
imitation, hardly to be distinguished except by an expert from the real
ones."




                        24. Poirot Gives Advice


It took the millionaire some few minutes to take the thing in. He
stared at Poirot as though dumbfounded. The little Belgian nodded at
him gently.

"Yes," he said, "it alters the position, does it not?"

"Imitation!"

He leaned forward.

"All along, M. Poirot, you have had this idea? All along this is what
you have been driving at? You never believed that the Comte de la Roche
was the murderer?"

"I have had doubts," said Poirot quietly. "I said as much to
you. Robbery with violence and murder"--he shook his head
energetically--"no, it is difficult to picture. It does not harmonize
with the personality of the Comte de la Roche."

"But you believe that he meant to steal the rubies?"

"Certainly. There is no doubt as to that. See, I will recount to you
the affair as I see it. The Comte knew of the rubies and he laid
his plans accordingly. He made up a romantic story of a book he was
writing, so as to induce your daughter to bring them with her. He
provided himself with an exact duplicate. It is clear, is it not,
that substitution is what he was after. Madame, your daughter, was
not an expert on jewels. It would probably be a long time before she
discovered what had occurred. When she did so--well--I do not think she
would prosecute the Comte. Too much would come out. He would have in
his possession various letters of hers. Oh yes, a very safe scheme from
the Comte's point of view--one that he has probably carried out before."

"It seems clear enough, yes," said Van Aldin musingly.

"It accords with the personality of the Comte de la Roche," said Poirot.

"Yes, but now--" Van Aldin looked searchingly at the other. "What
actually happened? Tell me that, M. Poirot."

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"It is quite simple," he said; "some one stepped in ahead of the Comte."

There was a long pause.

Van Aldin seemed to be turning things over in his mind. When he spoke
it was without beating about the bush.

"How long have you suspected my son-in-law, M. Poirot?"

"From the very first. He had the motive and the opportunity. Every one
took for granted that the man in Madame's compartment in Paris was the
Comte de la Roche. I thought so, too. Then you happened to mention
that you had once mistaken the Comte for your son-in-law. That told me
that they were of the same height and build, and alike in colouring.
It put some curious ideas in my head. The maid had only been with
your daughter a short time. It was unlikely that she would know Mr.
Kettering well by sight, since he had not been living in Curzon Street;
also the man was careful to keep his face turned away."

"You believe he--murdered her," said Van Aldin hoarsely.

Poirot raised a hand quickly.

"No, no, I did not say that--but it is a possibility--a very strong
possibility. He was in a tight corner, a very tight corner, threatened
with ruin. This was the one way out."

"But why take the jewels?"

"To make the crime appear an ordinary one committed by train robbers.
Otherwise suspicion might have fallen on him straight away."

"If that is so, what has he done with the rubies?"

"That remains to be seen. There are several possibilities. There is
a man in Nice who may be able to help, the man I pointed out at the
tennis."

He rose to his feet and Van Aldin rose also and laid his hand on the
little man's shoulder. His voice when he spoke was harsh with emotion.

"Find Ruth's murderer for me," he said, "that is all I ask."

Poirot drew himself up.

"Leave it in the hands of Hercule Poirot," he said superbly; "have no
fears. I will discover the truth."

He brushed a speck of fluff from his hat, smiled reassuringly at the
millionaire, and left the room. Nevertheless, as he went down the
stairs some of the confidence faded from his face.

"It is all very well," he murmured to himself, "but there are
difficulties. Yes, there are great difficulties." As he was passing out
of the hotel he came to a sudden halt. A car had drawn up in front of
the door. In it was Katherine Grey, and Derek Kettering was standing
beside it talking to her earnestly. A minute or two later the car drove
off and Derek remained standing on the pavement looking after it. The
expression on his face was an odd one. He gave a sudden impatient
gesture of the shoulders, sighed deeply, and turned to find Hercule
Poirot standing at his elbow. In spite of himself he started. The two
men looked at each other. Poirot steadily and unwaveringly and Derek
with a kind of light-hearted defiance. There was a sneer behind the
easy mockery of his tone when he spoke, raising his eyebrows slightly
as he did so.

"Rather a dear, isn't she?" he asked easily.

His manner was perfectly natural.

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully, "that describes Mademoiselle Katherine
very well. It is very English, that phrase there, and Mademoiselle
Katherine, she also is very English."

Derek remained perfectly still without answering.

"And yet she is _sympathique_, is it not so?"

"Yes," said Derek; "there are not many like her."

He spoke softly, almost as though to himself. Poirot nodded
significantly. Then he leant towards the other and spoke in a different
tone, a quiet, grave tone that was new to Derek Kettering.

"You will pardon an old man, Monsieur, if he says to you something that
you may consider impertinent. There is one of your English proverbs
that I would quote to you. It says that 'it is well to be off with the
old love, before being on with the new.'"

Kettering turned on him angrily.

"What the devil do you mean?"

"You enrage yourself at me," said Poirot placidly. "I expected as much.
As to what I mean--I mean, Monsieur, that there is a second car with a
lady in it. If you turn your head you will see her."

Derek spun round. His face darkened with anger.

"Mirelle, damn her!" he muttered. "I will soon--"

Poirot arrested the movement he was about to make.

"Is it wise what you are about to do there?" he asked warningly. His
eyes shone softly with a green light in them. But Derek was past
noticing the warning signs. In his anger he was completely off his
guard.

"I have broken with her utterly, and she knows it," cried Derek angrily.

"You have broken with her, yes, but has _she_ broken with you?"

Derek gave a sudden harsh laugh.

"She won't break with two million pounds if she can help it," he
murmured brutally; "trust Mirelle for that."

Poirot raised his eyebrows.

"You have the outlook cynical," he murmured.

"Have I?" There was no mirth in his sudden wide smile. "I have lived
in the world long enough, M. Poirot, to know that all women are pretty
much alike." His face softened suddenly. "All save one."

He met Poirot's gaze defiantly. A look of alertness crept into his
eyes, then faded again. "That one," he said, and jerked his head in the
direction of Cap Martin.

"Ah!" said Poirot.

This quiescence was well calculated to provoke the impetuous
temperament of the other.

"I know what you are going to say," said Derek rapidly, "the kind of
life I have led, the fact that I am not worthy of her. You will say
that I have no right to think even of such a thing. You will say that
it is not a case of giving a dog a bad name--I know that it is not
decent to be speaking like this with my wife dead only a few days, and
murdered at that."

He paused for breath, and Poirot took advantage of the pause to remark
in his plaintive tone:

"But, indeed, I have not said anything at all."

"But you will."

"Eh?" said Poirot.

"You will say that I have no earthly chance of marrying Katherine."

"No," said Poirot, "I would not say that. Your reputation is bad,
yes, but with women--never does that deter them. If you were a man of
excellent character, of strict morality who had done nothing that he
should not do, and--possibly everything that he should do--_eh bien!_
then I should have grave doubts of your success. Moral worth, you
understand, it is not romantic. It is appreciated, however, by widows."

Derek Kettering stared at him, then he swung round on his heel and went
up to the waiting car.

Poirot looked after him with some interest. He saw the lovely vision
lean out of the car and speak.

Derek Kettering did not stop. He lifted his hat and passed straight on.

"_Ça y est_," said M. Hercule Poirot, "it is time, I think, that I
return _chez moi_."

He found the imperturbable George pressing trousers.

"A pleasant day, Georges, somewhat fatiguing, but not without
interest," he said.

George received these remarks in his usual wooden fashion.

"Indeed, sir."

"The personality of a criminal, Georges, is an interesting matter. Many
murderers are men of great personal charm."

"I always heard, sir, that Dr. Crippen was a pleasant-spoken gentleman.
And yet he cut up his wife like so much mincemeat."

"Your instances are always apt, Georges."

The valet did not reply, and at that moment the telephone rang. Poirot
took up the receiver.

"'Allo--'allo--yes, yes, it is Hercule Poirot who speaks."

"This is Knighton. Will you hold the line a minute, M. Poirot? Mr. Van
Aldin would like to speak to you."

There was a moment's pause, then the millionaire's voice came through.

"Is that you, M. Poirot? I just wanted to tell you that Mason came to
me now of her own accord. She has been thinking it over, and she says
that she is almost certain that the man at Paris was Derek Kettering.
There was something familiar about him at the time, she says, but at
the minute she could not place it. She seems pretty certain now."

"Ah," said Poirot, "thank you, M. Van Aldin. That advances us."

He replaced the receiver, and stood for a minute or two with a very
curious smile on his face. George had to speak to him twice before
obtaining an answer.

"Eh?" said Poirot. "What is that that you say to me?"

"Are you lunching here, sir, or are you going out?"

"Neither," said Poirot, "I shall go to bed and take a _tisane_. The
expected has happened, and when the expected happens, it always causes
me emotion."




                             25. Defiance


As Derek Kettering passed the car, Mirelle leant out.

"Dereek--I must speak to you for a moment--"

But, lifting his hat, Derek passed straight on without stopping.

When he got back to his hotel, the concierge detached himself from his
wooden pen and accosted him.

"A gentleman is waiting to see you, Monsieur."

"Who is it?" asked Derek.

"He did not give me his name, Monsieur, but he said his business with
you was important, and that he would wait."

"Where is he?"

"In the little salon, Monsieur. He preferred it to the lounge he said,
as being more private."

Derek nodded, and turned his steps in that direction.

The small salon was empty except for the visitor, who rose and bowed
with easy foreign grace as Derek entered. As it chanced, Derek had
seen the Comte de la Roche only once, but found no difficulty in
recognizing that aristocratic nobleman, and he frowned angrily. Of all
the consummate impertinence!

"The Comte de la Roche, is it not?" he said. "I am afraid you have
wasted your time in coming here."

"I hope not," said the Comte agreeably. His white teeth glittered.

The Comte's charm of manner was usually wasted on his own sex. All men,
without exception, disliked him heartily. Derek Kettering was already
conscious of a distinct longing to kick the Count bodily out of the
room. It was only the realization that scandal would be unfortunate
just at present that restrained him. He marvelled anew that Ruth could
have cared, as she certainly had, for this fellow. A bounder, and worse
than a bounder. He looked with distaste at the Count's exquisitely
manicured hands.

"I called," said the Comte, "on a little matter of business. It would
be advisable, I think, for you to listen to me."

Again Derek felt strongly tempted to kick him out, but again he
refrained. The hint of a threat was not lost upon him, but he
interpreted it in his own way. There were various reasons why it would
be better to hear what the Comte had to say.

He sat down and drummed impatiently with his fingers on the table.

"Well," he said sharply, "what is it?"

It was not the Comte's way to come out into the open at once.

"Allow me, Monsieur, to offer you my condolences on your recent
bereavement."

"If I have any impertinence from you," said Derek quietly, "you go out
by that window."

He nodded his head towards the window beside the Comte, and the latter
moved uneasily.

"I will send my friends to you, Monsieur, if that is what you desire,"
he said haughtily.

Derek laughed.

"A duel, eh? My dear Count, I don't take you seriously enough for that.
But I should take a good deal of pleasure in kicking you down the
Promenade des Anglais."

The Comte was not at all anxious to take offence. He merely raised his
eyebrows and murmured:

"The English are barbarians."

"Well," said Derek, "what is it you have to say to me?"

"I will be frank," said the Comte, "I will come immediately to the
point. That will suit us both, will it not?"

Again he smiled in his agreeable fashion.

"Go on," said Derek curtly.

The Comte looked at the ceiling, joined the tips of his fingers
together, and murmured softly:

"You have come into a lot of money, Monsieur."

"What the devil has that got to do with you?"

The Comte drew himself up.

"Monsieur, my name is tarnished! I am suspected--accused--of foul
crime."

"The accusation does not come from me," said Derek coldly; "as an
interested party I have not expressed any opinion."

"I am innocent," said the Comte, "I swear before heaven"--he raised his
hand to heaven--"that I am innocent."

"M. Carrège is, I believe, the Juge d'Instruction in charge of the
case," hinted Derek politely.

The Comte took no notice.

"Not only am I unjustly suspected of a crime that I did not commit, but
I am also in serious need of money."

He coughed softly and suggestively.

Derek rose to his feet.

"I was waiting for that," he said softly; "you blackmailing brute! I
will not give you a penny. My wife is dead, and no scandal that you can
make can touch her now. She wrote you foolish letters, I dare say. If I
were to buy them from you for a round sum at this minute, I am pretty
certain that you would manage to keep one or two back; and I will tell
you this, M. de la Roche, blackmailing is an ugly word both in England
and in France. That is my answer to you. Good afternoon."

"One moment"--the Comte stretched out a hand as Derek was turning
to leave the room. "You are mistaken, Monsieur. You are completely
mistaken. I am, I hope, a 'gentleman.'" Derek laughed. "Any letters
that a lady might write to me I should hold sacred." He flung back his
head with a beautiful air of nobility. "The proposition that I was
putting before you was of quite a different nature. I am, as I said,
extremely short of money, and my conscience might impel me to go to the
police with certain information."

Derek came slowly back into the room.

"What do you mean?"

The Comte's agreeable smile flashed forth once more.

"Surely it is not necessary to go into details," he purred. "Seek whom
the crime benefits, they say, don't they? As I said just now, you have
come into a lot of money lately."

Derek laughed.

"If that is all--" he said contemptuously.

But the Comte was shaking his head.

"But it is not all, my dear sir. I should not come to you unless I
had much more precise and detailed information than that. It is not
agreeable, Monsieur, to be arrested and tried for murder."

Derek came close up to him. His face expressed such furious anger that
involuntarily the Comte drew back a pace or two.

"Are you threatening _me_?" the young man demanded angrily.

"You shall hear nothing more of the matter," the Comte assured him.

"Of all the colossal bluffs that I have ever struck--"

The Comte raised a white hand.

"You are wrong. It is not a bluff. To convince you I will tell you
this. My information was obtained from a certain lady. It is she who
holds the irrefutable proof that you committed the murder."

"She? Who?"

"Mademoiselle Mirelle."

Derek drew back as though struck.

"Mirelle," he muttered.

The Comte was quick to press what he took to be his advantage.

"A bagatelle of one hundred thousand francs," he said. "I ask no more."

"Eh?" said Derek absently.

"I was saying, Monsieur, that a bagatelle of one hundred thousand
francs would satisfy my--conscience."

Derek seemed to recollect himself. He looked earnestly at the Comte.

"You would like my answer now?"

"If you please, Monsieur."

"Then here it is. You can go to the devil. See?"

Leaving the Comte too astonished to speak, Derek turned on his heel and
swung out of the room.

Once out of the hotel he hailed a taxi and drove to Mirelle's hotel. On
inquiring, he learned that the dancer had just come in. Derek gave the
concierge his card.

"Take this up to Mademoiselle and ask if she will see me."

A very brief interval elapsed, and then Derek was bidden to follow a
_chasseur_.

A wave of exotic perfume assailed Derek's nostrils as he stepped over
the threshold of the dancer's apartments. The room was filled with
carnations, orchids, and mimosa. Mirelle was standing by the window in
a _peignoir_ of foamy lace.

She came towards him, her hands outstretched.

"Dereek--you have come to me. I knew you would."

He put aside the clinging arms and looked down on her sternly.

"Why did you send the Comte de la Roche to me?"

She looked at him in astonishment, which he took to be genuine.

"I? Send the Comte de la Roche to you? But for what?"

"Apparently--for blackmail," said Derek grimly.

Again she stared. Then suddenly she smiled and nodded her head.

"Of course. It was to be expected. It is what he would do, _ce type
là_. I might have known it. No, indeed, Dereek, I did not send him."

He looked at her piercingly, as though seeking to read her mind.

"I will tell you," said Mirelle. "I am ashamed, but I will tell you.
The other day, you comprehend, I was mad with rage, quite mad--" she
made an eloquent gesture. "My temperament, it is not a patient one. I
want to be revenged on you, and so I go to the Comte de la Roche, and
I tell him to go to the police and say so and so, and so and so. But
have no fear, Dereek. Not completely did I lose my head; the proof
rests with me alone. The police can do nothing without my word, you
understand? And now--now?"

She nestled up close to him, looking up at him with melting eyes.

He thrust her roughly away from him. She stood there, her breast
heaving, her eyes narrowing to a cat-like slit.

"Be careful, Dereek, be very careful. You have come back to me, have
you not?"

"I shall never come back to you," said Derek steadily.

"Ah!"

More than ever the dancer looked like a cat. Her eyelids flickered.

"So there is another woman? The one with whom you lunched that day. Eh!
am I right?"

"I intend to ask that lady to marry me. You might as well know."

"That prim Englishwoman! Do you think that I will support that for one
moment? Ah, no." Her beautiful lithe body quivered. "Listen, Dereek,
do you remember that conversation we had in London? You said the only
thing that could save you was the death of your wife. You regretted
that she was so healthy. Then the idea of an accident came to your
brain. And more than an accident."

"I suppose," said Derek contemptuously, "that it was this conversation
that you repeated to the Comte de la Roche."

Mirelle laughed.

"Am I a fool? Could the police do anything with a vague story like
that? See--I will give you a last chance. You shall give up this
Englishwoman. You shall return to me. And then, _chéri_, never, never
will I breathe--"

"Breathe what?"

She laughed softly. "You thought no one saw you--"

"What do you mean?"

"As I say, you thought no one saw you--but _I_ saw you, Dereek, _mon
ami_; _I saw you coming out of the compartment of Madame your wife just
before the train got into Lyons that night._ _And_ I know more than
that. I know that when you came out of her compartment she was dead."

He stared at her. Then, like a man in a dream he turned very slowly and
went out of the room, swaying slightly as he walked.




                             26. A Warning


"And so it is," said Poirot, "that we are the good friends and have no
secrets from each other."

Katherine turned her head to look at him. There was something in his
voice, some undercurrent of seriousness, which she had not heard before.

They were sitting in the gardens of Monte Carlo. Katherine had come
over with her friends, and they had run into Knighton and Poirot almost
immediately on arrival. Lady Tamplin had seized upon Knighton and had
overwhelmed him with reminiscences, most of which Katherine had a faint
suspicion were invented. They had moved away together, Lady Tamplin
with her hand on the young man's arm. Knighton had thrown a couple of
glances back over his shoulder, and Poirot's eyes twinkled a little as
he saw them.

"Of course we are friends," said Katherine.

"From the beginning we have been sympathetic to each other," mused
Poirot.

"When you told me that a 'Roman Policier' occurs in real life."

"And I was right, was I not?" he challenged her, with an emphatic
forefinger. "Here we are, plunged in the middle of one. That is natural
for me--it is my _métier_--but for you it is different. Yes," he added
in a reflective tone, "for you it is different."

She looked sharply at him. It was as though he were warning her,
pointing out to her some menace that she had not seen.

"Why do you say that I am in the middle of it? It is true that I
had that conversation with Mrs. Kettering just before she died, but
now--now all that is over. I am not connected with the case any more."

"Ah, Mademoiselle, Mademoiselle, can we ever say, 'I have finished with
this or that'?"

Katherine turned defiantly round to face him.

"What is it?" she asked. "You are trying to tell me something--to
convey it to me rather. But I am not clever at taking hints. I would
much rather that you said anything you have to say straight out."

Poirot looked at her sadly. "_Ah, mais c'est Anglais ça_," he murmured,
"everything in black and white, everything clear cut and well defined.
But life, it is not like that, Mademoiselle. There are the things that
are not yet, but which cast their shadow before."

He dabbed his brow with a very large silk pocket-handkerchief and
murmured:

"Ah, but it is that I become poetical. Let us, as you say, speak only
of facts. And, speaking of facts, tell me what you think of Major
Knighton."

"I like him very much indeed," said Katherine warmly; "he is quite
delightful."

Poirot sighed.

"What is the matter?" asked Katherine.

"You reply so heartily," said Poirot. "If you had said in an
indifferent voice, 'Oh, quite nice,' _eh bien_, do you know I should
have been better pleased."

Katherine did not answer. She felt slightly uncomfortable. Poirot went
on dreamily:

"And yet, who knows? With _les femmes_, they have so many ways of
concealing what they feel--and heartiness is perhaps as good a way as
any other."

He sighed.

"I don't see--" began Katherine.

He interrupted her.

"You do not see why I am being so impertinent, Mademoiselle? I am an
old man, and now and then--not very often--I come across some one whose
welfare is dear to me. We are friends, Mademoiselle. You have said so
yourself. And it is just this--I should like to see you happy."

Katherine stared very straight in front of her. She had a cretonne
sunshade with her, and with its point she traced little designs in the
gravel at her feet.

"I have asked you a question about Major Knighton, now I will ask you
another. Do you like Mr. Derek Kettering?"

"I hardly know him," said Katherine.

"That is not an answer, that."

"I think it is."

He looked at her, struck by something in her tone. Then he nodded his
head gravely and slowly.

"Perhaps you are right, Mademoiselle. See you, I who speak to you have
seen much of the world, and I know that there are two things which are
true. A good man may be ruined by his love for a bad woman--but the
other way holds good also. A bad man may equally be ruined by his love
for a good woman."

Katherine looked up sharply.

"When you say ruined--"

"I mean from his point of view. One must be wholehearted in crime as in
everything else."

"You are trying to warn me," said Katherine in a low voice. "Against
whom?"

"I cannot look into your heart, Mademoiselle; I do not think you would
let me if I could. I will just say this. There are men who have a
strange fascination for women."

"The Comte de la Roche," said Katherine, with a smile.

"There are others--more dangerous than the Comte de la Roche. They
have qualities that appeal--recklessness, daring, audacity. You are
fascinated, Mademoiselle; I see that, but I think that it is no more
than that. I hope so. This man of whom I speak, the emotion he feels is
genuine enough, but all the same--"

"Yes?"

He got up and stood looking down at her. Then he spoke, in a low,
distinct voice:

"You could, perhaps, love a thief, Mademoiselle, _but not a murderer_."

He wheeled sharply away on that and left her sitting there.

He heard the little gasp she gave and paid no attention. He had
said what he meant to say. He left her there to digest that last
unmistakable phrase.

Derek Kettering, coming out of the Casino into the sunshine, saw her
sitting alone on the bench and joined her.

"I have been gambling," he said, with a light laugh, "gambling
unsuccessfully. I have lost everything--everything, that is, that I
have with me."

Katherine looked at him with a troubled face. She was aware at once
of something new in his manner, some hidden excitement that betrayed
itself in a hundred different infinitesimal signs.

"I should think you were always a gambler. The spirit of gambling
appeals to you."

"Every day and in every way a gambler? You are about right. Don't _you_
find something stimulating in it? To risk all on one throw--there is
nothing like it."

Calm and stolid as she believed herself to be, Katherine felt a faint
answering thrill.

"I want to talk to you," went on Derek, "and who knows when I may have
another opportunity? There is an idea going about that I murdered
my wife--no, please don't interrupt. It is absurd, of course." He
paused for a minute or two, then went on, speaking more deliberately.
"In dealing with the police and Local Authorities here I have had to
pretend to--well--a certain decency. I prefer not to pretend with you.
I meant to marry money. I was on the lookout for money when I first
met Ruth Van Aldin. She had the look of a slim Madonna about her,
and I--well--I made all sorts of good resolutions--and was bitterly
disillusioned. My wife was in love with another man when she married
me. She never cared for me in the least. Oh, I am not complaining; the
thing was a perfectly respectable bargain. She wanted Leconbury and I
wanted money. The trouble arose simply through Ruth's American blood.
Without caring a pin for me, she would have liked me to be continually
dancing attendance. Time and again she as good as told me that she had
bought me and that I belonged to her. The result was that I behaved
abominably to her. My father-in-law will tell you that, and he is
quite right. At the time of Ruth's death, I was faced with absolute
disaster." He laughed suddenly. "One _is_ faced with absolute disaster
when one is up against a man like Rufus Van Aldin."

"And then?" asked Katherine in a low voice.

"And then," Derek shrugged his shoulders, "Ruth was murdered--very
providentially."

He laughed, and the sound of his laugh hurt Katherine. She winced.

"Yes," said Derek, "that wasn't in very good taste. But it is quite
true. Now I am going to tell you something more. From the very first
moment I saw you I knew you were the only woman in the world for me. I
was--afraid of you. I thought you might bring me bad luck."

"Bad luck?" said Katherine sharply.

He stared at her. "Why do you repeat it like that? What have you got in
your mind?"

"I was thinking of things that people have said to me."

Derek grinned suddenly. "They will say a lot to you about me, my dear,
and most of it will be true. Yes, and worse things too--things that I
shall never tell you. I have been a gambler always--and I have taken
some long odds. I shan't confess to you now or at any other time. The
past is done with. There is one thing I do wish you to believe. I swear
to you solemnly that I did not kill my wife."

He said the words earnestly enough, yet there was somehow a theatrical
touch about them. He met her troubled gaze and went on:

"I know. I lied the other day. It _was_ my wife's compartment I went
into."

"Ah," said Katherine.

"It's difficult to explain just why I went in, but I'll try. I did it
on an impulse. You see, I was more or less spying on my wife. I kept
out of sight on the train. Mirelle had told me that my wife was meeting
the Comte de la Roche in Paris. Well, as far as I had seen, that was
not so. I felt ashamed, and I thought suddenly that it would be a good
thing to have it out with her once and for all, so I pushed open the
door and went in."

He paused.

"Yes," said Katherine gently.

"Ruth was lying on the bunk asleep--her face was turned away from me--I
could see only the back of her head. I could have waked her up, of
course. But suddenly I felt a reaction. What, after all, was there to
say that we hadn't both of us said a hundred times before? She looked
so peaceful lying there. I left the compartment as quietly as I could."

"Why lie about it to the police?" asked Katherine.

"Because I'm not a complete fool. I've realized from the beginning
that, from the point of view of motive, I'm the ideal murderer. If I
once admitted that I had been in her compartment just before she was
murdered, I'd do for myself once and for all."

"I see."

Did she see? She could not have told herself. She was feeling the
magnetic attraction of Derek's personality, but there was something in
her that resisted, that held back....

"Katherine--"

"I--"

"You know that I care for you. Do--do you care for me?"

"I--I don't know."

Weakness there. Either she knew or she did not know. If--if only--

She cast a look round desperately as though seeking something that
would help her. A soft colour rose in her cheeks as a tall fair man
with a limp came hurrying along the path towards them--Major Knighton.

There was relief and an unexpected warmth in her voice as she greeted
him.

Derek stood up scowling, his face black as a thundercloud.

"Lady Tamplin having a flutter?" he said easily. "I must join her and
give her the benefit of my system."

He swung round on his heel and left them together. Katherine sat down
again. Her heart was beating rapidly and unevenly, but as she sat there
talking commonplaces to the quiet, rather shy man beside her, her
self-command came back.

Then she realized with a shock that Knighton also was laying bare his
heart, much as Derek had done, but in a very different manner.

He was shy and stammering. The words came haltingly with no eloquence
to back them.

"From the first moment I saw you--I--I ought not to have spoken so
soon--but Mr. Van Aldin may leave here any day, and I might not
have another chance. I know you can't care for me so soon--that is
impossible. I dare say it is presumption anyway on my part. I have
private means, but not very much--no, please don't answer now. I know
what your answer would be. But in case I went away suddenly I just
wanted you to know--that I care."

She was shaken--touched. His manner was so gentle and appealing.

"There's one thing more. I just wanted to say that if--if you are ever
in trouble, anything that I can do--"

He took her hand in his, held it tightly for a minute, then dropped it
and walked rapidly away towards the Casino without looking back.

Katherine sat perfectly still, looking after him. Derek
Kettering--Richard Knighton--two men so different--so very different.
There was something kind about Knighton, kind and trustworthy. As to
Derek--

Then suddenly Katherine had a very curious sensation. She felt that
she was no longer sitting alone on the seat in the Casino gardens, but
that some one was standing beside her, and that that some one was the
dead woman, Ruth Kettering. She had a further impression that Ruth
wanted--badly--to tell her something. The impression was so curious, so
vivid, that it could not be driven away. She felt absolutely certain
that the spirit of Ruth Kettering was trying to convey something of
vital importance to her. The impression faded. Katherine got up,
trembling a little. What was it that Ruth Kettering had wanted so badly
to say?




                      27. Interview with Mirelle


When Knighton left Katherine he went in search of Hercule Poirot, whom
he found in the Rooms, jauntily placing the minimum stake on the even
numbers. As Knighton joined him, the number thirty-three turned up, and
Poirot's stake was swept away.

"Bad luck!" said Knighton; "are you going to stake again?"

Poirot shook his head.

"Not at present."

"Do you feel the fascination of gambling?" asked Knighton curiously.

"Not at roulette."

Knighton shot a swift glance at him. His own face became troubled. He
spoke haltingly, with a touch of deference.

"I wonder, are you busy, M. Poirot? There is something I would like to
ask you about."

"I am at your disposal. Shall we go outside? It is pleasant in the
sunshine."

They strolled out together, and Knighton drew a deep breath.

"I love the Riviera," he said. "I came here first twelve years ago,
during the War, when I was sent to Lady Tamplin's Hospital. It was like
Paradise, coming from Flanders to this."

"It must have been," said Poirot.

"How long ago the War seems now!" mused Knighton.

They walked on in silence for some little way.

"You have something on your mind?" said Poirot.

Knighton looked at him in some surprise.

"You are quite right," he confessed. "I don't know how you knew it,
though."

"It showed itself only too plainly," said Poirot drily.

"I did not know that I was so transparent."

"It is my business to observe the physiognomy," the little man
explained, with dignity.

"I will tell you, M. Poirot. You have heard of this dancer
woman--Mirelle?"

"She who is the _chère amie_ of M. Derek Kettering?"

"Yes, that is the one; and, knowing this, you will understand that Mr.
Van Aldin is naturally prejudiced against her. She wrote to him, asking
for an interview. He told me to dictate a curt refusal, which of course
I did. This morning she came to the hotel and sent up her card, saying
that it was urgent and vital that she should see Mr. Van Aldin at once."

"You interest me," said Poirot.

"Mr. Van Aldin was furious. He told me what message to send down to
her. I ventured to disagree with him. It seemed to me both likely and
probable that this woman Mirelle might give us valuable information.
We know that she was on the Blue Train, and she may have seen or heard
something that it might be vital for us to know. Don't you agree with
me, M. Poirot?"

"I do," said Poirot drily. "M. Van Aldin, if I may say so, behaved
exceedingly foolishly."

"I am glad you take that view of the matter," said the secretary. "Now
I am going to tell you something, M. Poirot. So strongly did I feel the
unwisdom of Mr. Van Aldin's attitude that I went down privately and had
an interview with the lady."

"_Eh bien?_"

"The difficulty was that she insisted on seeing Mr. Van Aldin himself.
I softened his message as much as I possibly could. In fact--to be
candid--I gave it in a very different form. I said that Mr. Van Aldin
was too busy to see her at present, but that she might make any
communication she wished to me. That, however, she could not bring
herself to do, and she left without saying anything further. But I have
a strong impression, M. Poirot, that that woman knows something."

"This is serious," said Poirot quietly. "You know where she is staying?"

"Yes." Knighton mentioned the name of the hotel.

"Good," said Poirot; "we will go there immediately."

The secretary looked doubtful.

"And Mr. Van Aldin?" he queried doubtfully.

"M. Van Aldin is an obstinate man," said Poirot drily. "I do not argue
with obstinate men. I act in spite of them. We will go and see the lady
immediately. I will tell her that you are empowered by M. Van Aldin to
act for him, and you will guard yourself well from contradicting me."

Knighton still looked slightly doubtful, but Poirot took no notice of
his hesitation.

At the hotel, they were told that Mademoiselle was in, and Poirot sent
up both his and Knighton's cards, with "From Mr. Van Aldin" pencilled
upon them.

Word came down that Mademoiselle Mirelle would receive them.

When they were ushered into the dancer's apartments, Poirot immediately
took the lead.

"Mademoiselle," he murmured, bowing very low, "we are here on behalf of
M. Van Aldin."

"Ah! And why did he not come himself?"

"He is indisposed," said Poirot mendaciously; "the Riviera throat, it
has him in its grip, but me, I am empowered to act for him, as is Major
Knighton, his secretary. Unless, of course, Mademoiselle would prefer
to wait a fortnight or so."

If there was one thing of which Poirot was tolerably certain, it was
that to a temperament such as Mirelle's the mere word "wait" was
anathema.

"_Eh bien_, I will speak, Messieurs," she cried. "I have been patient.
I have held my hand. And for what? That I should be insulted! Yes,
insulted! Ah! Does he think to treat Mirelle like that? To throw her
off like an old glove. I tell you never has a man tired of me. Always
it is I who tire of them."

She paced up and down the room, her slender body trembling with rage. A
small table impeded her free passage and she flung it from her into a
corner, where it splintered against the wall.

"That is what I will do to him," she cried, "and that!"

Picking up a glass bowl filled with lilies she flung it into the grate,
where it smashed into a hundred pieces.

Knighton was looking at her with cold British disapproval. He felt
embarrassed and ill at ease. Poirot, on the other hand, with twinkling
eyes was thoroughly enjoying the scene.

"Ah, it is magnificent!" he cried. "It can be seen--Madame has a
temperament."

"I am an artist," said Mirelle; "every artist has a temperament. I told
Dereek to beware, and he would not listen." She whirled round on Poirot
suddenly. "It is true, is it not, that he wants to marry that English
miss?"

Poirot coughed.

"_On m'a dit_," he murmured, "that he adores her passionately."

Mirelle came towards them.

"He murdered his wife," she screamed. "There--now you have it! He told
me beforehand that he meant to do it. He had got to an _impasse_--zut!
he took the easiest way out."

"You say that M. Kettering murdered his wife."

"Yes, yes, yes. Have I not told you so?"

"The police," murmured Poirot, "will need proof of that--er--statement."

"I tell you I saw him come out of her compartment that night on the
train."

"When?" asked Poirot sharply.

"Just before the train reached Lyons."

"You will swear to that, Mademoiselle?"

It was a different Poirot who spoke now, sharp and decisive.

"Yes."

There was a moment's silence. Mirelle was panting, and her eyes, half
defiant, half frightened, went from the face of one man to the other.

"This is a serious matter, Mademoiselle," said the detective. "You
realize how serious?"

"Certainly I do."

"That is well," said Poirot. "Then you understand, Mademoiselle, that
no time must be lost. You will, perhaps, accompany us immediately to
the office of the Examining Magistrate."

Mirelle was taken aback. She hesitated, but, as Poirot had foreseen,
she had no loophole for escape.

"Very well," she muttered. "I will fetch a coat."

Left alone together, Poirot and Knighton exchanged glances.

"It is necessary to act while--how do you say it?--the iron is hot,"
murmured Poirot. "She is temperamental; in an hour's time, maybe, she
will repent, and she will wish to draw back. We must prevent that at
all costs."

Mirelle reappeared, wrapped in a sand-coloured velvet wrap trimmed with
leopard skin. She looked not altogether unlike a leopardess, tawny and
dangerous. Her eyes still flashed with anger and determination.

They found M. Caux and the Examining Magistrate together. A few
brief introductory words from Poirot, and Mademoiselle Mirelle was
courteously entreated to tell her tale. This she did in much the same
words as she had done to Knighton and Poirot, though with far more
soberness of manner.

"This is an extraordinary story, Mademoiselle," said M. Carrège slowly.
He leant back in his chair, adjusted his pince-nez, and looked keenly
and searchingly at the dancer through them.

"You wish us to believe M. Kettering actually boasted of the crime to
you beforehand?"

"Yes, yes. She was too healthy, he said. If she were to die it must be
an accident--he would arrange it all."

"You are aware, Mademoiselle," said M. Carrège sternly, "that you are
making yourself out to be an accessory before the fact?"

"Me? But not the least in the world, Monsieur. Not for a moment did I
take that statement seriously. Ah no, indeed! I know men, Monsieur;
they say many wild things. It would be an odd state of affairs if one
were to take all they said _au pied de la lettre_."

The Examining Magistrate raised his eyebrows.

"We are to take it, then, that you regarded M. Kettering's threats as
mere idle words? May I ask, Mademoiselle, what made you throw up your
engagements in London and come out to the Riviera?"

Mirelle looked at him with melting black eyes.

"I wished to be with the man I loved," she said simply. "Was it so
unnatural?"

Poirot interpolated a question gently.

"Was it, then, at M. Kettering's wish that you accompanied him to Nice?"

Mirelle seemed to find a little difficulty in answering this. She
hesitated perceptibly before she spoke. When she did, it was with a
haughty indifference of manner.

"In such matters I please myself, Monsieur," she said.

That the answer was not an answer at all was noted by all three men.
They said nothing.

"When were you first convinced that M. Kettering had murdered his wife?"

"As I tell you, Monsieur, I saw M. Kettering come out of his wife's
compartment just before the train drew into Lyons. There was a look on
his face--ah! at the moment I could not understand it--a look haunted
and terrible. I shall never forget it."

Her voice rose shrilly, and she flung out her arms in an extravagant
gesture.

"Quite so," said M. Carrège.

"Afterwards, when I found that Madame Kettering was dead when the train
left Lyons, then--then I knew!"

"And still--you did not go to the police, Mademoiselle," said the
Commissary mildly.

Mirelle glanced at him superbly; she was clearly enjoying herself in
the rôle she was playing.

"Shall I betray my lover?" she asked. "Ah no; do not ask a woman to do
that."

"Yet now--" hinted M. Caux.

"Now it is different. He has betrayed me! Shall I suffer that in
silence...?"

The Examining Magistrate checked her.

"Quite so, quite so," he murmured soothingly. "And now, Mademoiselle,
perhaps you will read over the statement of what you have told us, see
that it is correct, and sign it."

Mirelle wasted no time on the document.

"Yes, yes," she said, "it is correct." She rose to her feet. "You
require me no longer, Messieurs?"

"At present, no, Mademoiselle."

"And Dereek will be arrested?"

"At once, Mademoiselle."

Mirelle laughed cruelly and drew her fur draperies closer about her.

"He should have thought of this before he insulted me," she cried.

"There is one little matter"--Poirot coughed apologetically--"just a
matter of detail."

"Yes?"

"What makes you think Madame Kettering was dead when the train left
Lyons?"

Mirelle stared.

"But she _was_ dead."

"Was she?"

"Yes, of course. I--"

She came to an abrupt stop. Poirot was regarding her intently, and he
saw the wary look that came into her eyes.

"I have been told so. Everybody says so."

"Oh," said Poirot, "I was not aware that the fact had been mentioned
outside the Examining Magistrate's office."

Mirelle appeared somewhat discomposed.

"One hears those things," she said vaguely; "they get about. Somebody
told me. I can't remember who it was."

She moved to the door. M. Caux sprang forward to open it for her, and
as he did so, Poirot's voice rose gently once more.

"And the jewels? Pardon, Mademoiselle. Can you tell me anything about
those?"

"The jewels? What jewels?"

"The rubies of Catherine the Great. Since you hear so much, you must
have heard of them."

"I know nothing about any jewels," said Mirelle sharply.

She went out, closing the door behind her. M. Caux came back to his
chair; the Examining Magistrate sighed.

"What a fury!" he said, "but _diablement chic_, I wonder if she is
telling the truth? I think so."

"There is _some_ truth in her story, certainly," said Poirot. "We have
confirmation of it from Miss Grey. She was looking down the corridor a
short time before the train reached Lyons and she saw M. Kettering go
into his wife's compartment."

"The case against him seems quite clear," said the Commissary, sighing;
"it is a thousand pities," he murmured.

"How do you mean?" asked Poirot.

"It has been the ambition of my life to lay the Comte de la Roche
by the heels. This time, _ma foi_, I thought we had got him. This
other--it is not nearly so satisfactory."

M. Carrège rubbed his nose.

"If anything goes wrong," he observed cautiously, "it will be most
awkward. M. Kettering is of the aristocracy. It will get into the
newspapers. If we have made a mistake--" He shrugged his shoulders
forebodingly.

"The jewels now," said the Commissary, "what do you think he has done
with them?"

"He took them for a plant, of course," said M. Carrège; "they must have
been a great inconvenience to him and very awkward to dispose of."

Poirot smiled.

"I have an idea of my own about the jewels. Tell me, Messieurs, what do
you know of a man called the Marquis?"

The Commissary leant forward excitedly.

"The Marquis," he said, "the Marquis? Do you think he is mixed up in
this affair, M. Poirot?"

"I ask you what you know of him."

The Commissary made an expressive grimace.

"Not as much as we should like to," he observed ruefully. "He works
behind the scenes, you understand. He has underlings who do his dirty
work for him. But he is some one high up. That we are sure of. He does
not come from the criminal classes."

"A Frenchman?"

"Y--es. At least we believe so. But we are not sure. He has worked in
France, in England, in America. There was a series of robberies in
Switzerland last autumn which were laid at his door. By all accounts
he is a _grand seigneur_, speaking French and English with equal
perfection and his origin is a mystery."

Poirot nodded and rose to take his departure.

"Can you tell us nothing more, M. Poirot," urged the Commissary.

"At present, no," said Poirot, "but I may have news awaiting me at my
hotel."

M. Carrège looked uncomfortable. "If the Marquis is concerned in
this--" he began, and then stopped.

"It upsets our ideas," complained M. Caux.

"It does not upset mine," said Poirot. "On the contrary, I think it
agrees with them very well. Au revoir, Messieurs; if news of any
importance comes to me I will communicate it to you immediately."

He walked back to his hotel with a grave face. In his absence a
telegram had come to him. Taking a paper-cutter from his pocket, he
slit it open. It was a long telegram, and he read it over twice before
slowly putting it in his pocket. Upstairs, George was awaiting his
master.

"I am fatigued, Georges, much fatigued. Will you order for me a small
pot of chocolate?"

The chocolate was duly ordered and brought, and George set it at the
little table at his master's elbow. As he was preparing to retire,
Poirot spoke:

"I believe, Georges, that you have a good knowledge of the English
aristocracy?" murmured Poirot.

George smiled apologetically.

"I think that I might say that I have, sir," he replied.

"I suppose that it is your opinion, Georges, that criminals are
invariably drawn from the lower orders."

"Not always, sir. There was great trouble with one of the Duke of
Devize's younger sons. He left Eton under a cloud, and after that he
caused great anxiety on several occasions. The police would not accept
the view that it was kleptomania. A very clever young gentleman, sir,
but vicious through and through, if you take my meaning. His Grace
shipped him to Australia, and I hear he was convicted out there under
another name. Very odd, sir, but there it is. The young gentleman, I
need hardly say, was not in want financially."

Poirot nodded his head slowly.

"Love of excitement," he murmured, "and a little kink in the brain
somewhere. I wonder now--"

He drew out the telegram from his pocket and read it again.

"Then there was Lady Mary Fox's daughter," continued the valet in a
mood of reminiscence. "Swindled tradespeople something shocking, she
did. Very worrying to the best families, if I may say so, and there are
many other queer cases I could mention."

"You have a wide experience, Georges," murmured Poirot. "I often
wonder having lived so exclusively with titled families that you
demean yourself by coming as a valet to me. I put it down to love of
excitement on your part."

"Not exactly, sir," said George. "I happened to see in _Society
Snippets_ that you had been received at Buckingham Palace. That was
just when I was looking for a new situation. His Majesty, so it said,
had been most gracious and friendly and thought very highly of your
abilities."

"Ah," said Poirot, "one always likes to know the reason for things."

He remained in thought for a few moments and then said:

"You rang up Mademoiselle Papopolous?"

"Yes, sir; she and her father will be pleased to dine with you
to-night."

"Ah," said Poirot thoughtfully. He drank off his chocolate, set the
cup and saucer neatly in the middle of the tray, and spoke gently, more
to himself than to the valet.

"The squirrel, my good Georges, collects nuts. He stores them up in
the autumn so that they may be of advantage to him later. To make a
success of humanity, Georges, we must profit by the lessons of those
below us in the animal kingdom. I have always done so. I have been the
cat, watching at the mouse hole. I have been the good dog following up
the scent, and not taking my nose from the trail. And also, my good
Georges, I have been the squirrel. I have stored away the little fact
here, the little fact there. I go now to my store and I take out one
particular nut, a nut that I stored away--let me see, seventeen years
ago. You follow me, Georges?"

"I should hardly have thought, sir," said George, "that nuts would have
kept so long as that, though I know one can do wonders with preserving
bottles."

Poirot looked at him and smiled.




                     28. Poirot Plays the Squirrel


Poirot started to keep his dinner appointment with a margin of
three-quarters of an hour to spare. He had an object in this. The car
took him, not straight to Monte Carlo, but to Lady Tamplin's house at
Cap Martin, where he asked for Miss Grey. The ladies were dressing and
Poirot was shown into a small salon to wait, and here, after a lapse of
three or four minutes, Lenox Tamplin came to him.

"Katherine is not quite ready yet," she said. "Can I give her a
message, or would you rather wait until she comes down?"

Poirot looked at her thoughtfully. He was a minute or two in replying,
as though something of great weight hung upon his decision. Apparently
the answer to such a simple question mattered.

"No," he said at last, "no, I do not think it is necessary that I
should wait to see Mademoiselle Katherine. I think, perhaps, that it is
better that I should not. These things are sometimes difficult."

Lenox waited politely, her eyebrows slightly raised.

"I have a piece of news," continued Poirot. "You will, perhaps, tell
your friend. M. Kettering was arrested to-night for the murder of his
wife."

"You want me to tell Katherine that?" asked Lenox. She breathed rather
hard, as though she had been running; her face, Poirot thought, looked
white and strained--rather noticeably so.

"If you please, Mademoiselle."

"Why?" said Lenox. "Do you think Katherine will be upset? Do you think
she cares?"

"I don't know, Mademoiselle," said Poirot. "See, I admit it frankly.
As a rule I know everything, but in this case, I--well, I do not. You,
perhaps, know better than I do."

"Yes," said Lenox, "I know--but I am not going to tell you all the
same."

She paused for a minute or two, her dark brows drawn together in a
frown.

"You believe he did it?" she said abruptly.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

"The police say so."

"Ah," said Lenox, "hedging, are you? So there is something to hedge
about."

Again she was silent, frowning. Poirot said gently:

"You have known Derek Kettering a long time, have you not?"

"Off and on ever since I was a kid," said Lenox gruffly.

Poirot nodded his head several times without speaking.

With one of her brusque movements Lenox drew forward a chair and sat
down on it, her elbows on the table and her face supported by her
hands. Sitting thus, she looked directly across the table at Poirot.

"What have they got to go on?" she demanded. "Motive, I suppose.
Probably came into money at her death."

"He came into two million."

"And if she had not died he would have been ruined?"

"Yes."

"But there must have been more than that," persisted Lenox. "He
travelled by the same train, I know, but--that would not be enough to
go on by itself."

"A cigarette case with the letter 'K' on it which did not belong to
Mrs. Kettering was found in her carriage, and he was seen by two people
entering and leaving the compartment just before the train got into
Lyons."

"What two people?"

"Your friend Miss Grey was one of them. The other was Mademoiselle
Mirelle, the dancer."

"And he, Derek, what has he got to say about it?" demanded Lenox
sharply.

"He denies having entered his wife's compartment at all," said Poirot.

"Fool!" said Lenox crisply, frowning. "Just before Lyons, you say? Does
nobody know when--when she died?"

"The doctors' evidence necessarily cannot be very definite," said
Poirot; "they are inclined to think that death was unlikely to have
occurred after leaving Lyons. And we know this much, that a few moments
after leaving Lyons Mrs. Kettering was dead."

"How do you know that?"

Poirot was smiling rather oddly to himself.

"Some one else went into her compartment and found her dead."

"And they did not rouse the train?"

"No."

"Why was that?"

"Doubtless they had their reasons."

Lenox looked at him sharply.

"Do you know the reason?"

"I think so--yes."

Lenox sat still turning things over in her mind. Poirot watched her in
silence. At last she looked up. A soft colour had come into her cheeks
and her eyes were shining.

"You think some one on the train must have killed her, but that need
not be so at all. What is to stop any one swinging themselves on to
the train when it stopped at Lyons? They could go straight to her
compartment, strangle her, and take the rubies and drop off the train
again without any one being the wiser. She may have been actually
killed while the train was in Lyons station. Then she would have been
alive when Derek went in, and dead when the other person found her."

Poirot leant back in his chair. He drew a deep breath. He looked across
at the girl and nodded his head three times, then he heaved a sigh.

"Mademoiselle," he said, "what you have said there is very just--very
true. I was struggling in darkness, and you have shown me a light.
There was a point that puzzled me and you have made it plain."

He got up.

"And Derek?" said Lenox.

"Who knows?" said Poirot, with a shrug of his shoulders. "But I will
tell you this, Mademoiselle. I am not satisfied; no, I, Hercule Poirot,
am not yet satisfied. It may be that this very night I shall learn
something more. At least, I go to try."

"You are meeting some one?"

"Yes."

"Some one who knows something?"

"Some one who might know something. In these matters one must leave no
stone unturned. Au revoir, Mademoiselle."

Lenox accompanied him to the door.

"Have I--helped?" she asked.

Poirot's face softened as he looked up at her standing on the doorstep
above him.

"Yes, Mademoiselle, you have helped. If things are very dark, always
remember that."

When the car had driven off he relapsed into a frowning absorption, but
in his eyes was that faint green light which was always the precursor
of the triumph to be.

He was a few minutes late at the rendezvous, and found that M.
Papopolous and his daughter had arrived before him. His apologies were
abject, and he outdid himself in politeness and small attentions.
The Greek was looking particularly benign and noble this evening, a
sorrowful patriarch of blameless life. Zia was looking handsome and
good humoured. The dinner was a pleasant one. Poirot was his best and
most sparkling self. He told anecdotes, he made jokes, he paid graceful
compliments to Zia Papopolous, and he told many interesting incidents
of his career. The menu was a carefully selected one, and the wine was
excellent.

At the close of dinner M. Papopolous inquired politely:

"And the tip I gave you? You have had your little flutter on the horse?"

"I am in communication with--er--my bookmaker," replied Poirot.

The eyes of the two men met.

"A well-known horse, eh?"

"No," said Poirot; "it is what our friends, the English, call a dark
horse."

"Ah!" said M. Papopolous thoughtfully.

"Now we must step across to the Casino and have our little flutter at
the roulette table," cried Poirot gaily.

At the Casino the party separated, Poirot devoting himself solely to
Zia, whilst Papopolous himself drifted away.

Poirot was not fortunate, but Zia had a run of good luck, and had soon
won a few thousand francs.

"It would be as well," she observed drily to Poirot, "if I stopped now."

Poirot's eyes twinkled.

"Superb!" he exclaimed. "You are the daughter of your father,
Mademoiselle Zia. To know when to stop. Ah! that is the art."

He looked round the rooms.

"I cannot see your father anywhere about," he remarked carelessly. "I
will fetch your cloak for you, Mademoiselle, and we will go out in the
gardens."

He did not, however, go straight to the cloak-room. His sharp eyes had
seen but a little while before the departure of M. Papopolous. He was
anxious to know what had become of the wily Greek. He ran him to earth
unexpectedly in the big entrance hall. He was standing by one of the
pillars, talking to a lady who had just arrived. The lady was Mirelle.

Poirot sidled unostentatiously round the room. He arrived at the other
side of the pillar, and unnoticed by the two who were talking together
in an animated fashion--or rather, that is to say, the dancer was
talking, Papopolous contributing an occasional monosyllable and a good
many expressive gestures.

"I tell you I must have time," the dancer was saying. "If you give me
time I will get the money."

"To wait"--the Greek shrugged his shoulders--"it is awkward."

"Only a very little while," pleaded the other. "Ah! but you must! A
week--ten days--that is all I ask. You can be sure of your affair. The
money will be forthcoming."

Papopolous shifted a little and looked round him uneasily--to find
Poirot almost at his elbow with a beaming innocent face.

"_Ah! vous voilà_, M. Papopolous. I have been looking for you. It
is permitted that I take Mademoiselle Zia for a little turn in the
gardens? Good evening, Mademoiselle." He bowed very low to Mirelle. "A
thousand pardons that I did not see you immediately."

The dancer accepted his greetings rather impatiently. She was clearly
annoyed at the interruption of her _tête-à-tête_. Poirot was quick
to take the hint. Papopolous had already murmured: "Certainly--but
certainly," and Poirot withdrew forthwith.

He fetched Zia's cloak, and together they strolled out into the gardens.

"This is where the suicides take place," said Zia.

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. "So it is said. Men are foolish, are
they not, Mademoiselle? To eat, to drink, to breathe the good air,
it is a very pleasant thing, Mademoiselle. One is foolish to leave
all that simply because one has no money--or because the heart aches.
_L'amour_, it causes many fatalities, does it not?"

Zia laughed.

"You should not laugh at love, Mademoiselle," said Poirot, shaking an
energetic forefinger at her. "You who are young and beautiful."

"Hardly that," said Zia; "you forget that I am thirty-three, M. Poirot.
I am frank with you, because it is no good being otherwise. As you told
my father, it is exactly seventeen years since you aided us in Paris
that time."

"When I look at you, it seems much less," said Poirot gallantly. "You
were then very much as you are now, Mademoiselle, a little thinner,
a little paler, a little more serious. Sixteen years old and fresh
from your pension. Not quite the _petite pensionnaire_, not quite a
woman. You were very delicious, very charming, Mademoiselle Zia; others
thought so too, without doubt."

"At sixteen," said Zia, "one is simple and a little fool."

"That may be," said Poirot, "yes, that well may be. At sixteen one is
credulous, is one not? One believes what one is told."

If he saw the quick sideways glance that the girl shot at him, he
pretended not to have done so. He continued dreamily: "It was a
curious affair that, altogether. Your father, Mademoiselle, has never
understood the true inwardness of it."

"No?"

"When he asked me for details, for explanations, I said to him thus:
'Without scandal, I have got back for you that which was lost. You must
ask no questions.' Do you know, Mademoiselle, why I said these things?"

"I have no idea," said the girl coldly.

"It was because I had a soft spot in my heart for a little
pensionnaire, so pale, so thin, so serious."

"I don't understand what you are talking about," cried Zia angrily.

"Do you not, Mademoiselle? Have you forgotten Antonio Pirezzio?"

He heard the quick intake of her breath--almost a gasp.

"He came to work as an assistant in the shop, but not thus could he
have got hold of what he wanted. An assistant can lift his eyes to
his master's daughter, can he not? If he is young and handsome with
a glib tongue. And since they cannot make love all the time, they
must occasionally talk of things that interest them both--such as
that very interesting thing which was temporarily in M. Papopolous'
possession. And since, as you say, Mademoiselle, the young are foolish
and credulous, it was easy to believe him and to give him a sight of
that particular thing, to show him where it was kept. And afterwards
when it is gone--when the unbelievable catastrophe has happened. Alas!
the poor little pensionnaire. What a terrible position she is in. She
is frightened, the poor little one. To speak or not to speak? And
then there comes along that excellent fellow, Hercule Poirot. Almost
a miracle it must have been, the way things arranged themselves. The
priceless heirlooms are restored and there are no awkward questions."

Zia turned on him fiercely.

"You have known all the time? Who told you? Was it--was it Antonio?"

Poirot shook his head.

"No one told me," he said quietly. "I guessed. It was a good guess, was
it not, Mademoiselle? You see, unless you are good at guessing, it is
not much use being a detective."

The girl walked along beside him for some minutes in silence. Then she
said in a hard voice:

"Well, what are you going to do about it, are you going to tell my
father?"

"No," said Poirot sharply. "Certainly not."

She looked at him curiously.

"You want something from me?"

"I want your help, Mademoiselle."

"What makes you think that I can help you?"

"I do not think so. I only hope so."

"And if I do not help you, then--you will tell my father?"

"But no, but no! Debarrass yourself of that idea, Mademoiselle. I
am not a blackmailer. I do not hold your secret over your head and
threaten you with it."

"If I refuse to help you--" began the girl slowly.

"Then you refuse, and that is that."

"Then why--" she stopped.

"Listen, and I will tell you why. Women, Mademoiselle, are generous. If
they can render a service to one who has rendered a service to them,
they will do it. I was generous once to you, Mademoiselle. When I might
have spoken, I held my tongue."

There was another silence; then the girl said, "My father gave you a
hint the other day."

"It was very kind of him."

"I do not think," said Zia slowly, "that there is anything that I can
add to that."

If Poirot was disappointed he did not show it. Not a muscle of his face
changed.

"_Eh bien!_" he said cheerfully, "then we must talk of other things."

And he proceeded to chat gaily. The girl was _distraite_, however, and
her answers were mechanical and not always to the point. It was when
they were approaching the Casino once more that she seemed to come to a
decision.

"M. Poirot?"

"Yes, Mademoiselle?"

"I--I should like to help you if I could."

"You are very amiable, Mademoiselle--very amiable."

Again there was a pause. Poirot did not press her. He was quite content
to wait and let her take her own time.

"Ah bah," said Zia, "after all, why should I not tell you? My father is
cautious--always cautious in everything he says. But I know that with
you it is not necessary. You have told us it is only the murderer you
seek, and that you are not concerned over the jewels. I believe you.
You were quite right when you guessed that we were in Nice because
of the rubies. They have been handed over here according to plan. My
father has them now. He gave you a hint the other day as to who our
mysterious client was."

"The Marquis?" murmured Poirot softly.

"Yes, the Marquis."

"Have you ever seen the Marquis, Mademoiselle Zia?"

"Once," said the girl. "But not very well," she added. "It was through
a keyhole."

"That always presents difficulties," said Poirot sympathetically, "but
all the same you saw him. You would know him again?"

Zia shook her head.

"He wore a mask," she explained.

"Young or old?"

"He had white hair. It may have been a wig, it may not. It fitted very
well. But I do not think he was old. His walk was young, and so was his
voice."

"His voice?" said Poirot thoughtfully. "Ah, his voice! Would you know
it again, Mademoiselle Zia?"

"I might," said the girl.

"You were interested in him, eh? It was that that took you to the
keyhole."

Zia nodded.

"Yes, yes. I was curious. One had heard so much--he is not the ordinary
thief--he is more like a figure of history or romance."

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully, "yes; perhaps so."

"But it is not this that I meant to tell you," said Zia. "It was just
one other little fact that I thought might be--well--useful to you."

"Yes?" said Poirot encouragingly.

"The rubies, as I say, were handed over to my father here at Nice. I
did not see the person who handed them over, but--"

"Yes?"

"I know one thing. _It was a woman._"




                        29. A Letter From Home


    "_Dear Katherine--Living among grand friends as you are doing now,
    I don't suppose you will care to hear any of our news; but as I
    always thought you were a sensible girl, perhaps you are a trifle
    less swollen-headed than I suppose. Everything goes on much the
    same here. There was great trouble about the new curate, who is
    scandalously high. In my view, he is neither more nor less than a
    Roman. Everybody has spoken to the Vicar about it, but you know
    what the Vicar is--all Christian charity and no proper spirit. I
    have had a lot of trouble with maids lately. That girl Annie was
    no good--skirts up to her knees and wouldn't wear sensible woollen
    stockings. Not one of them can bear being spoken to. I have had a
    lot of pain with my rheumatism one way and another, and Dr. Harris
    persuaded me to go and see a London specialist--a waste of three
    guineas and a railway fare, as I told him; but by waiting until
    Wednesday I managed to get a cheap return. The London doctor pulled
    a long face and talked all round about and never straight out,
    until I said to him, 'I'm a plain woman, Doctor, and I like things
    to be plainly stated. Is it cancer, or is it not?' And then, of
    course, he had to say it was. They say a year with care, and not
    too much pain, though I am sure I can bear pain as well as any
    other Christian woman. Life seems rather lonely at times, with most
    of my friends dead or gone before. I wish you were in St. Mary
    Mead, my dear, and that is a fact. If you hadn't come into this
    money and gone off into grand society, I would have offered you
    double the salary poor Jane gave you to come and look after me;
    but there--there's no good wanting what we can't get. However, if
    things should go ill with you--and that is always possible. I have
    heard no end of tales of bogus noblemen marrying girls and getting
    hold of their money and then leaving them at the church door. I
    dare say you are too sensible for anything of the kind to happen to
    you, but one never knows; and never having had much attention of
    any kind it might easily go to your head now. So just in case, my
    dear, remember there is always a home for you here; and though a
    plain-spoken woman I am a warm-hearted one too.--Your affectionate
    old friend,_

                                                       "_Amelia Viner._

    "_P.S.--I saw a mention of you in the paper with your cousin,
    Viscountess Tamplin, and I cut it out and put it with my cuttings.
    I prayed for you on Sunday that you might be kept from pride and
    vainglory._"

Katherine read this characteristic epistle through twice, then she laid
it down and stared out of her bedroom window across the blue waters
of the Mediterranean. She felt a curious lump in her throat. A sudden
wave of longing for St. Mary Mead swept over her. So full of familiar,
everyday, stupid little things--and yet--home. She felt very inclined
to lay her head down on her arms and indulge in a real good cry.

Lenox, coming in at the moment, saved her.

"Hello, Katherine," said Lenox. "I say--what is the matter?"

"Nothing," said Katherine, grabbing up Miss Viner's letter and
thrusting it into her handbag.

"You looked rather queer," said Lenox. "I say--I hope you don't mind--I
rang up your detective friend, M. Poirot, and asked him to lunch with
us in Nice. I said you wanted to see him, as I thought he might not
come for me."

"Did you want to see him then?" asked Katherine.

"Yes," said Lenox. "I have rather lost my heart to him. I never met a
man before whose eyes were really green like a cat's."

"All right," said Katherine. She spoke listlessly. The last few days
had been trying. Derek Kettering's arrest had been the topic of the
hour, and the Blue Train Mystery had been thrashed out from every
conceivable standpoint.

"I have ordered the car," said Lenox, "and I have told Mother some lie
or other--unfortunately I can't remember exactly what; but it won't
matter, as she never remembers. If she knew where we were going, she
would want to come too, to pump M. Poirot."

The two girls arrived at the Negresco to find Poirot waiting.

He was full of Gallic politeness, and showered so many compliments upon
the two girls that they were soon helpless with laughter; yet for all
that the meal was not a gay one. Katherine was dreamy and distracted,
and Lenox made bursts of conversation, interspersed by silences. As
they were sitting on the terrace sipping their coffee she suddenly
attacked Poirot bluntly.

"How are things going? You know what I mean?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders. "They take their course," he said.

"And you are just letting them take their course?"

He looked at Lenox a little sadly.

"You are young, Mademoiselle, but there are three things that cannot be
hurried--_le bon Dieu_, Nature, and old people."

"Nonsense!" said Lenox. "You are not old."

"Ah, it is pretty what you say there."

"Here is Major Knighton," said Lenox.

Katherine looked round quickly and then turned back again.

"He is with Mr. Van Aldin," continued Lenox. "There is something I want
to ask Major Knighton about. I won't be a minute."

Left alone together, Poirot bent forward and murmured to Katherine:

"You are _distraite_, Mademoiselle; your thoughts, they are far away,
are they not?"

"Just as far as England, no farther."

Guided by a sudden impulse, she took the letter she had received that
morning and handed it across to him to read.

"That is the first word that has come to me from my old life; somehow
or other--it hurts."

He read it through and then handed it back to her. "So you are going
back to St. Mary Mead?" he said slowly.

"No, I am not," said Katherine; "why should I?"

"Ah," said Poirot, "it is my mistake. You will excuse me one little
minute."

He strolled across to where Lenox Tamplin was talking to Van Aldin and
Knighton. The American looked old and haggard. He greeted Poirot with a
curt nod but without any other sign of animation.

As he turned to reply to some observation made by Lenox, Poirot drew
Knighton aside.

"M. Van Aldin looks ill," he said.

"Do you wonder?" asked Knighton. "The scandal of Derek Kettering's
arrest has about put the lid on things, as far as he is concerned. He
is even regretting that he asked you to find out the truth."

"He should go back to England," said Poirot.

"We are going the day after to-morrow."

"That is good news," said Poirot.

He hesitated, and looked across the terrace to where Katherine was
sitting.

"I wish," he murmured, "that you could tell Miss Grey that."

"Tell her what?"

"That you--I mean that M. Van Aldin is returning to England."

Knighton looked a little puzzled, but he readily crossed the terrace
and joined Katherine.

Poirot saw him go with a satisfied nod of the head, and then joined
Lenox and the American. After a minute or two they joined the others.
Conversation was general for a few minutes, then the millionaire and
his secretary departed. Poirot also prepared to take his departure.

"A thousand thanks for your hospitality, Mesdemoiselles," he cried;
"it has been a most charming luncheon. _Ma foi_, I needed it!" He
swelled out his chest and thumped it. "I am now a lion--a giant. Ah,
Mademoiselle Katherine, you have not seen me as I can be. You have
seen the gentle, the calm Hercule Poirot; but there is another Hercule
Poirot. I go now to bully, to threaten, to strike terror into the
hearts of those who listen to me."

He looked at them in a self-satisfied way, and they both appeared to be
duly impressed, though Lenox was biting her under lip, and the corners
of Katherine's mouth had a suspicious twitch.

"And I shall do it," he said gravely. "Oh yes, I shall succeed."

He had gone but a few steps when Katherine's voice made him turn.

"M. Poirot, I--I want to tell you. I think you were right in what you
said. I am going back to England almost immediately."

Poirot stared at her very hard, and under the directness of his
scrutiny she blushed.

"I see," he said gravely.

"I don't believe you do," said Katherine.

"I know more than you think, Mademoiselle," he said quietly.

He left her, with an odd little smile upon his lips. Entering a waiting
car, he drove to Antibes.

Hippolyte, the Comte de la Roche's wooden-faced man-servant, was busy
at the Villa Marina polishing his master's beautiful cut table glass.
The Comte de la Roche himself had gone to Monte Carlo for the day.
Chancing to look out of the window, Hippolyte espied a visitor walking
briskly up to the hall door, a visitor of so uncommon a type that
Hippolyte, experienced as he was, had some difficulty in placing him.
Calling to his wife, Marie, who was busy in the kitchen, he drew her
attention to what he called _ce type là_.

"It is not the police again?" said Marie anxiously.

"Look for yourself," said Hippolyte.

Marie looked.

"Certainly not the police," she declared. "I am glad."

"They have not really worried us much," said Hippolyte. "In fact, but
for Monsieur le Comte's warning, I should never have guessed that
stranger at the wine-shop to be what he was."

The hall bell pealed and Hippolyte, in a grave and decorous manner,
went to open the door.

"M. le Comte, I regret to say, is not at home."

The little man with the large moustaches beamed placidly.

"I know that," he replied. "You are Hippolyte Flavelle, are you not?"

"Yes, Monsieur, that is my name."

"And you have a wife, Marie Flavelle?"

"Yes, Monsieur, but--"

"I desire to see you both," said the stranger, and he stepped nimbly
past Hippolyte into the hall.

"Your wife is doubtless in the kitchen," he said. "I will go there."

Before Hippolyte could recover his breath, the other had selected the
right door at the back of the hall and passed along the passage and
into the kitchen, where Marie paused open-mouthed to stare at him.

"_Voilà_," said the stranger, and sank into a wooden arm-chair; "I am
Hercule Poirot."

"Yes, Monsieur?"

"You do not know the name?"

"I have never heard it," said Hippolyte.

"Permit me to say that you have been badly educated. It is the name of
one of the great ones of this world."

He sighed and folded his hands across his chest.

Hippolyte and Marie were staring at him uneasily. They were at a loss
what to make of this unexpected and extremely strange visitor.

"Monsieur desires--" murmured Hippolyte mechanically.

"I desire to know why you have lied to the police."

"Monsieur!" cried Hippolyte; "I--lied to the police? Never have I done
such a thing."

M. Poirot shook his head.

"You are wrong," he said; "you have done it on several occasions. Let
me see." He took a small notebook from his pocket and consulted it.
"Ah, yes; on seven occasions at least. I will recite them to you."

In a gentle unemotional voice he proceeded to outline the seven
occasions.

Hippolyte was taken aback.

"But it is not of these past lapses that I wish to speak," continued
Poirot, "only, my dear friend, do not get into the habit of thinking
yourself too clever. I come now to the particular lie in which I am
concerned--your statement that the Comte de la Roche arrived at this
villa on the morning of 14th January."

"But that was no lie, Monsieur; that was the truth. Monsieur le Comte
arrived here on the morning of Tuesday, the 14th. That is so, Marie, is
it not?"

Marie assented eagerly.

"Ah, yes, that is quite right. I remember it perfectly."

"Ah," said Poirot, "and what did you give your good master for
_déjeuner_ that day?"

"I--" Marie paused, trying to collect herself.

"Odd," said Poirot, "how one remembers some things--and forgets others."

He leant forward and struck the table a blow with his fist; his eyes
flashed with anger.

"Yes, yes, it is as I say. You tell your lies and you think nobody
knows. But there are two people who know. Yes--two people. One is _le
bon Dieu_--"

He raised a hand to heaven, and then settling himself back in his chair
and shutting his eyelids, he murmured comfortably:

"And the other is Hercule Poirot."

"I assure you, Monsieur, you are completely mistaken. Monsieur le Comte
left Paris on Monday night--"

"True," said Poirot--"by the Rapide. I do not know where he broke
his journey. Perhaps you do not know that. What I do know is that he
arrived here on Wednesday morning, and not on Tuesday morning."

"Monsieur is mistaken," said Marie stolidly.

Poirot rose to his feet.

"Then the law must take its course," he murmured. "A pity."

"What do you mean, Monsieur?" asked Marie, with a shade of uneasiness.

"You will be arrested and held as accomplices concerned in the murder
of Mrs. Kettering, the English lady who was killed."

"Murder!"

The man's face had gone chalk white, his knees knocked together. Marie
dropped the rolling-pin and began to weep.

"But it is impossible--impossible. I thought--"

"Since you stick to your story, there is nothing to be said. I think
you are both foolish."

He was turning towards the door when an agitated voice arrested him.

"Monsieur, Monsieur, just a little moment. I--I had no idea that it was
anything of this kind. I--I thought it was just a matter concerning a
lady. There have been little awkwardnesses with the police over ladies
before. But murder--that is very different."

"I have no patience with you," cried Poirot. He turned round on them
and angrily shook his fist in Hippolyte's face. "Am I to stop here all
day, arguing with a couple of imbeciles thus? It is the truth I want.
If you will not give it to me, that is your look out. _For the last
time, when did Monsieur le Comte arrive at the Villa Marina--Tuesday
morning or Wednesday morning?_"

"Wednesday," gasped the man, and behind him Marie nodded confirmation.

Poirot regarded them for a minute or two, then inclined his head
gravely.

"You are wise, my children," he said quietly. "Very nearly you were in
serious trouble."

He left the Villa Marina, smiling to himself.

"One guess, confirmed," he murmured to himself. "Shall I take a chance
on the other?"

It was six o'clock when the card of Monsieur Hercule Poirot was
brought up to Mirelle. She stared at it for a moment or two, and then
nodded. When Poirot entered, he found her walking up and down the room
feverishly. She turned on him furiously.

"Well?" she cried. "Well? What is it now? Have you not tortured me
enough, all of you? Have you not made me betray my poor Dereek? What
more do you want?"

"Just one little question, Mademoiselle. After the train left Lyons,
when you entered Mrs. Kettering's compartment--"

"What is that?"

Poirot looked at her with an air of mild reproach and began again.

"I say when you entered Mrs. Kettering's compartment--"

"I never did."

"And found her--"

"I never did."

"_Ah, sacré!_"

He turned on her in a rage and shouted at her, so that she cowered back
before him.

"Will you lie to me? I tell you I know what happened as well as though
I had been there. You went into her compartment and you found her
dead. I tell you I know it. To lie to me is dangerous. Be careful,
Mademoiselle Mirelle."

Her eyes wavered beneath his gaze and fell.

"I--I didn't--" she began uncertainly and stopped.

"There is only one thing about which I wonder," said Poirot--"I wonder,
Mademoiselle, if you found what you were looking for or whether--"

"Whether what?"

"Or whether some one else had been before you."

"I will answer no more questions," screamed the dancer. She tore
herself away from Poirot's restraining hand, and flinging herself down
on the floor in a frenzy, she screamed and sobbed. A frightened maid
came rushing in.

Hercule Poirot shrugged his shoulders, raised his eyebrows, and quietly
left the room.

But he seemed satisfied.




                     30. Miss Viner Gives Judgment


Katherine looked out of Miss Viner's bedroom window. It was raining,
not violently, but with a quiet, well-bred persistence. The window
looked out on a strip of front garden with a path down to the gate and
neat little flower-beds on either side, where later roses and pinks and
blue hyacinths would bloom.

Miss Viner was lying in a large Victorian bedstead. A tray with the
remains of breakfast had been pushed to one side and she was busy
opening her correspondence and making various caustic comments upon it.

Katherine had an open letter in her hand and was reading it through for
the second time. It was dated from the Ritz Hotel, Paris.

    "_Chère Mademoiselle Katherine" (it began)--"I trust that you are
    in good health and that the return to the English winter has not
    proved too depressing. Me, I prosecute my inquiries with the utmost
    diligence. Do not think that it is the holiday that I take here.
    Very shortly I shall be in England, and I hope then to have the
    pleasure of meeting you once more. It shall be so, shall it not?
    On arrival in London I shall write to you. You remember that we
    are the colleagues in this affair? But indeed I think you know that
    very well._

    "_Be assured, Mademoiselle, of my most respectful and devoted
    sentiments._

                                                    "_Hercule Poirot._"

Katherine frowned slightly. It was as though something in the letter
puzzled and intrigued her.

"A choir boys' picnic indeed," came from Miss Viner. "Tommy Saunders
and Albert Dykes ought to be left behind, and I shan't subscribe to it
unless they are. What those two boys think they are doing in church on
Sundays I don't know. Tommy sang, 'O God, make speed to save us,' and
never opened his lips again, and if Albert Dykes wasn't sucking a mint
humbug, my nose is not what it is and always has been."

"I know, they are awful," agreed Katherine.

She opened her second letter, and a sudden flush came to her cheeks.
Miss Viner's voice in the room seemed to recede into the far distance.

When she came back to a sense of her surroundings Miss Viner was
bringing a long speech to a triumphant termination.

"And I said to her, 'Not at all. As it happens, Miss Grey is Lady
Tamplin's own cousin.' What do you think of that?"

"Were you fighting my battles for me? That was very sweet of you."

"You can put it that way if you like. There is nothing to me in a
title. Vicar's wife or no vicar's wife, that woman is a cat. Hinting
you had bought your way into Society."

"Perhaps she was not so very far wrong."

"And look at you," continued Miss Viner. "Have you come back a stuck-up
fine lady, as well you might have done? No, there you are, as sensible
as ever you were, with a pair of good Balbriggan stockings on and
sensible shoes. I spoke to Ellen about it only yesterday. 'Ellen,' I
said, 'you look at Miss Grey. She has been hobnobbing with some of the
greatest in the land, and does she go about as you do with skirts up to
her knees and silk stockings that ladder when you look at them, and the
most ridiculous shoes that ever I set eyes on?'"

Katherine smiled a little to herself; it had apparently been worth
while to conform to Miss Viner's prejudices. The old lady went on with
increasing gusto.

"It has been a great relief to me that you have not had your head
turned. Only the other day I was looking for my cuttings. I have
several about Lady Tamplin and her War Hospital and what not, but I
cannot lay my hand upon them. I wish you would look, my dear; your
eyesight is better than mine. They are all in a box in the bureau
drawer."

Katherine glanced down at the letter in her hand and was about to
speak, but checked herself, and going over to the bureau found the box
of cuttings and began to look over them. Since her return to St. Mary
Mead her heart had gone out to Miss Viner in admiration of the old
woman's stoicism and pluck. She felt that there was little she could
do for her old friend, but she knew from experience how much those
seemingly small trifles meant to old people.

"Here is one," she said presently. "'Viscountess Tamplin, who is
running her villa at Nice as an Officers' Hospital, has just been the
victim of a sensational robbery, her jewels having been stolen. Amongst
them were some very famous emeralds, heirlooms of the Tamplin family.'"

"Probably paste," said Miss Viner; "a lot of these Society women's
jewels are."

"Here is another," said Katherine. "A picture of her, 'A charming
camera study of Viscountess Tamplin with her little daughter Lenox.'"

"Let me look," said Miss Viner. "You can't see much of the child's
face, can you? But I dare say that is just as well. Things go by
contraries in this world and beautiful mothers have hideous children. I
dare say the photographer realized that to take the back of the child's
head was the best thing he could do for her."

Katherine laughed.

"'One of the smartest hostesses on the Riviera this season is
Viscountess Tamplin, who has a villa at Cap Martin. Her cousin, Miss
Grey, who recently inherited a vast fortune in a most romantic manner,
is staying with her there.'"

"That is the one I wanted," said Miss Viner. "I expect there has been
a picture of you in one of the papers that I have missed; you know the
kind of thing. Mrs. Somebody or other Jones-Williams, at the something
or other Point-to-point, usually carrying a shooting-stick and having
one foot lifted up in the air. It must be a trial to some of them to
see what they look like."

Katherine did not answer. She was smoothing out the cutting with her
finger, and her face had a puzzled, worried look. Then she drew the
second letter out of its envelope and mastered its contents once more.
She turned to her friend.

"Miss Viner? I wonder--there is a friend of mine, some one I met on the
Riviera, who wants very much to come down and see me here?"

"A man," said Miss Viner.

"Yes."

"Who is he?"

"He is secretary to Mr. Van Aldin, the American millionaire."

"What is his name?"

"Knighton. Major Knighton."

"Hm--secretary to a millionaire. And wants to come down here. Now,
Katherine, I am going to say something to you for your own good. You
are a nice girl and a sensible girl, and though you have your head
screwed on the right way about most things, every woman makes a fool
of herself once in her life. Ten to one what this man is after is your
money."

With a gesture she arrested Katherine's reply. "I have been waiting
for something of this kind. What is a secretary to a millionaire? Nine
times out of ten it is a young man who likes living soft. A young
man with nice manners and a taste for luxury and no brains and no
enterprise, and if there is anything that is a softer job than being a
secretary to a millionaire it is marrying a rich woman for her money. I
am not saying that you might not be some man's fancy. But you are not
young, and though you have a very good complexion you are not a beauty,
and what I say to you is, don't make a fool of yourself; but if you
are determined to do so, do see that your money is properly tied up on
yourself. There, now I have finished. What have you got to say?"

"Nothing," said Katherine; "but would you mind if he did come to see
me?"

"I wash my hands of it," said Miss Viner. "I have done my duty, and
whatever happens now is on your own head. Would you like him to lunch
or to dinner? I dare say Ellen could manage dinner--that is, if she
didn't lose her head."

"Lunch would be very nice," said Katherine. "It is awfully kind of you,
Miss Viner. He asked me to ring him up, so I will do so and say that
we shall be pleased if he will lunch with us. He will motor down from
town."

"Ellen does a steak with grilled tomatoes pretty fairly," said Miss
Viner. "She doesn't do it well, but she does it better than anything
else. It is no good having a tart because she is heavy handed with
pastry; but her little castle puddings are not bad, and I dare say you
could find a nice piece of Stilton at Abbot's. I have always heard that
gentlemen like a nice piece of Stilton, and there is a good deal of
father's wine left, a bottle of sparkling Moselle, perhaps."

"Oh, no, Miss Viner; that is really not necessary."

"Nonsense, my child. No gentleman is happy unless he drinks something
with his meal. There is some good prewar whisky if you think he
would prefer that. Now do as I say and don't argue. The key of the
wine-cellar is in the third drawer down in the dressing-table, in the
second pair of stockings on the left-hand side."

Katherine went obediently to the spot indicated.

"The second pair, now mind," said Miss Viner. "The first pair has my
diamond earrings and my filigree brooch in it."

"Oh," said Katherine, rather taken aback, "wouldn't you like them put
in your jewel-case?"

Miss Viner gave vent to a terrific and prolonged snort.

"No, indeed! I have much too much sense for that sort of thing, thank
you. Dear, dear, I well remember how my poor father had a safe built in
downstairs. Pleased as Punch he was with it, and he said to my mother,
'Now, Mary, you bring me your jewels in their case every night and I
will lock them away for you.' My mother was a very tactful woman, and
she knew that gentlemen like having their own way, and she brought him
the jewel-case locked up just as he said.

"And one night burglars broke in, and of course--naturally--the first
thing they went for was the safe! It would be, with my father talking
up and down the village and bragging about it until you might have
thought he kept all King Solomon's diamonds there. They made a clean
sweep, got the tankards, the silver cups, and the presentation gold
plate that my father had had presented to him, _and_ the jewel-case."

She sighed reminiscently. "My father was in a great state over my
mother's jewels. There was the Venetian set and some very fine cameos
and some pale pink corals, and two diamond rings with quite large
stones in them. And then, of course, she had to tell him that, being
a sensible woman, she had kept her jewellery rolled up in a pair of
corsets, and there it was still as safe as anything."

"And the jewel-case had been quite empty?"

"Oh no, dear," said Miss Viner, "it would have been too light a weight
then. My mother was a very intelligent woman; she saw to that. She
kept her buttons in the jewel-case, and a very handy place it was.
Boot buttons in the top tray, trouser buttons in the second tray, and
assorted buttons below. Curiously enough, my father was quite annoyed
with her. He said he didn't like deceit. But I mustn't go chattering
on; you want to go and ring up your friend, and mind you choose a
nice piece of steak, and tell Ellen she is not to have holes in her
stockings when she waits at lunch."

"Is her name Ellen or Helen, Miss Viner? I thought--"

Miss Viner closed her eyes.

"I can sound my h's, dear, as well as any one, but Helen is _not_ a
suitable name for a servant. I don't know what the mothers in the lower
classes are coming to nowadays."

The rain had cleared away when Knighton arrived at the cottage. The
pale fitful sunshine shone down on it and burnished Katherine's head
as she stood in the doorway to welcome him. He came up to her quickly,
almost boyishly.

"I say, I hope you don't mind. I simply had to see you again soon. I
hope the friend you are staying with does not mind."

"Come in and make friends with her," said Katherine. "She can be most
alarming, but you will soon find that she has the softest heart in the
world."

Miss Viner was enthroned majestically in the drawing-room, wearing a
complete set of the cameos which had been so providentially preserved
in the family. She greeted Knighton with dignity and an austere
politeness which would have damped many men. Knighton, however, had a
charm of manner which was not easily set aside, and after about ten
minutes Miss Viner thawed perceptibly. Luncheon was a merry meal, and
Ellen, or Helen, in a new pair of silk stockings devoid of ladders
performed prodigies of waiting. Afterwards, Katherine and Knighton went
for a walk and they came back to have tea _tête-à-tête_, since Miss
Viner had gone to lie down.

When the car had finally driven off Katherine went slowly upstairs. A
voice called her and she went in to Miss Viner's bedroom.

"Friend gone?"

"Yes. Thank you so much for letting me ask him down."

"No need to thank me. Do you think I am the sort of old curmudgeon who
never will do anything for anybody?"

"I think you are a dear," said Katherine affectionately.

"Humph," said Miss Viner mollified.

As Katherine was leaving the room she called her back.

"Katherine?"

"Yes."

"I was wrong about that young man of yours. A man when he is making up
to anybody can be cordial and gallant and full of little attentions
and altogether charming. But when a man is really in love he can't
help looking like a sheep. Now, whenever that young man looked at you
he looked like a sheep. I take back all I said this morning. It is
genuine."




                        31. Mr. Aarons Lunches


"Ah!" said Mr. Joseph Aarons, appreciatively.

He took a long draught from his tankard, set it down with a sigh, wiped
the froth from his lips, and beamed across the table at his host,
Monsieur Hercule Poirot.

"Give me," said Mr. Aarons, "a good Porterhouse steak and a tankard of
something worth drinking, and any one can have your French fallals and
whatnots, your ordoovres and your omelettes and your little bits of
quail. Give me," he reiterated, "a Porterhouse steak."

Poirot, who had just complied with this request, smiled sympathetically.

"Not that there is much wrong with a steak and kidney pudding,"
continued Mr. Aarons. "Apple tart? Yes, I will take apple tart, thank
you, Miss, and a jug of cream."

The meal proceeded. Finally, with a long sigh, Mr. Aarons laid down his
spoon and fork preparatory to toying with some cheese before turning
his mind to other matters.

"There was a little matter of business I think you said, Monsieur
Poirot," he remarked. "Anything I can do to help you I am sure I shall
be most happy."

"That is very kind of you," said Poirot. "I said to myself, 'If you
want to know anything about the dramatic profession there is one person
who knows all that is to be known and that is my old friend, Mr. Joseph
Aarons.'"

"And you don't say far wrong," said Mr. Aarons complacently; "whether
it is past, present, or future, Joe Aarons is the man to come to."

"_Précisément._ Now I want to ask you, Monsieur Aarons, what you know
about a young woman called Kidd."

"Kidd? Kitty Kidd?"

"Kitty Kidd."

"Pretty smart, she was. Male impersonator, song and a dance--That one?"

"That is the one."

"_Very_ smart, she was. Made a good income. Never out of an engagement.
Male impersonation mostly, but, as a matter of fact, you could not
touch her as a character actress."

"So I have heard," said Poirot; "but she has not been appearing lately,
has she?"

"No. Dropped right out of things. Went over to France and took up with
some swell nobleman there. She quitted the stage then for good and all,
I guess."

"How long ago was that?"

"Let me see. Three years ago. And she has been a loss--let me tell you
that."

"She was clever?"

"Clever as a cartload of monkeys."

"You don't know the name of the man she became friends with in Paris?"

"He was a swell, I know that. A Count--or was it a Marquis? Now I come
to think of it, I believe it was a Marquis."

"And you know nothing about her since?"

"Nothing. Never even run across her accidentally like. I bet she is
tooling it round some of these foreign resorts. Being a Marquise to the
life. You couldn't put one over on Kitty. She would give as good as she
got any day."

"I see," said Poirot thoughtfully.

"I am sorry I can't tell you more, Monsieur Poirot," said the other. "I
would like to be of use to you if I could. You did me a good turn once."

"Ah, but we are quits on that; you, too, did me a good turn."

"One good turn deserves another. Ha, ha!" said Mr. Aarons.

"Your profession must be a very interesting one," said Poirot.

"So-so," said Mr. Aarons non-committally. "Taking the rough with
the smooth, it is all right. I don't do so badly at it, all things
considered, but you have to keep your eyes skinned. Never know what the
public will jump for next."

"Dancing has come very much to the fore in the last few years,"
murmured Poirot reflectively.

"_I_ never saw anything in this Russian ballet, but people like it. Too
highbrow for me."

"I met one dancer out on the Riviera--Mademoiselle Mirelle."

"Mirelle? She is hot stuff, by all accounts. There is always money
going to back her--though, so far as that goes, the girl can dance; I
have seen her, and I know what I am talking about. I never had much to
do with her myself, but I hear she is a terror to deal with. Tempers
and tantrums all the time."

"Yes," said Poirot thoughtfully; "yes, so I should imagine."

"Temperament!" said Mr. Aarons, "temperament! That is what they call
it themselves. My missus was a dancer before she married me, but I
am thankful to say she never had any temperament. You don't want
temperament in the home, Monsieur Poirot."

"I agree with you, my friend; it is out of place there."

"A woman should be calm and sympathetic, and a good cook," said Mr.
Aarons.

"Mirelle has not been long before the public, has she?" asked Poirot.

"About two and a half years, that is all," said Mr. Aarons. "Some
French Duke started her. I hear now that she has taken up with the
ex-Prime Minister of Greece. These are the chaps who manage to put
money away quietly."

"That is news to me," said Poirot.

"Oh, she's not one to let the grass grow under her feet. They say that
young Kettering murdered his wife on her account. I don't know, I am
sure. Anyway, he is in prison, and she had to look round for herself,
and pretty smart she has been about it. They say she is wearing a ruby
the size of a pigeon's egg--not that I have ever seen a pigeon's egg
myself, but that is what they always call it in works of fiction."

"A ruby the size of a pigeon's egg!" said Poirot. His eyes were green
and cat-like. "How interesting!"

"I had it from a friend of mine," said Mr. Aarons. "But, for all
I know, it may be coloured glass. They are all the same, these
women--they never stop telling tall stories about their jewels. Mirelle
goes about bragging that it has got a curse on it. 'Heart of Fire,' I
think she calls it."

"But if I remember rightly," said Poirot, "the ruby that is named
'Heart of Fire' is the centre stone in a necklace."

"There you are! Didn't I tell you there is no end to the lies women
will tell about their jewellery? This is a single stone, hung on a
platinum chain round her neck; but, as I said before, ten to one it is
a bit of coloured glass."

"No," said Poirot gently; "no--somehow I do not think it is coloured
glass."




                32. Katherine and Poirot Compare Notes


"You have changed, Mademoiselle," said Poirot suddenly. He and
Katherine were seated opposite each other at a small table at the Savoy.

"Yes, you have changed," he continued.

"In what way?"

"Mademoiselle, these _nuances_ are difficult to express."

"I am older."

"Yes, you are older. And by that I do not mean that the wrinkles and
the crows' feet are coming. When I first saw you, Mademoiselle, you
were a looker-on at life. You had the quiet, amused look of one who
sits back in the stalls and watches the play."

"And now?"

"Now, you no longer watch. It is an absurd thing, perhaps, that I
say here, but you have the wary look of a fighter who is playing a
difficult game."

"My old lady is difficult sometimes," said Katherine, with a smile;
"but I can assure you that I don't engage in deadly contests with her.
You must go down and see her some day, Monsieur Poirot. I think you are
one of the people who would appreciate her pluck and her spirit."

There was a silence while the waiter deftly served them with chicken
_en casserole_. When he had departed, Poirot said:

"You have heard me speak of my friend Hastings?--he who said that I was
a human oyster. _Eh bien_, Mademoiselle, I have met my match in you.
You, far more than I, play a lone hand."

"Nonsense," said Katherine lightly.

"Never does Hercule Poirot talk nonsense. It is as I say."

Again there was a silence. Poirot broke it by inquiring:

"Have you seen any of our Riviera friends since you have been back,
Mademoiselle?"

"I have seen something of Major Knighton."

"A-ha! Is that so?"

Something in Poirot's twinkling eyes made Katherine lower hers.

"So Mr. Van Aldin remains in London?"

"Yes."

"I must try to see him to-morrow or the next day."

"You have news for him?"

"What makes you think that?"

"I--wondered, that is all."

Poirot looked across at her with twinkling eyes.

"And now, Mademoiselle, there is much that you wish to ask me, I can
see that. And why not? Is not the affair of the Blue Train our own
'Roman Policier'?"

"Yes, there are things I should like to ask you."

"_Eh bien?_"

Katherine looked up with a sudden air of resolution.

"What were you doing in Paris, Monsieur Poirot?"

Poirot smiled slightly.

"I made a call at the Russian Embassy."

"Oh."

"I see that that tells you nothing. But I will not be a human oyster.
No, I will lay my cards on the table, which is assuredly a thing that
oysters do not do. You suspect, do you not, that I am not satisfied
with the case against Derek Kettering?"

"That is what I have been wondering. I thought, in Nice, that you had
finished with the case."

"You do not say all that you mean, Mademoiselle. But I admit
everything. It was I--my researches--which placed Derek Kettering
where he is now. But for me the Examining Magistrate would still
be vainly trying to fasten the crime on the Comte de la Roche. _Eh
bien_, Mademoiselle, what I have done I do not regret. I have only
one duty--to discover the truth, and that way led straight to Mr.
Kettering. But did it end there? The police say yes, but I, Hercule
Poirot, am not satisfied."

He broke off suddenly. "Tell me, Mademoiselle, have you heard from
Mademoiselle Lenox lately?"

"One very short, scrappy letter. She is, I think, annoyed with me for
coming back to England."

Poirot nodded.

"I had an interview with her the night that Monsieur Kettering was
arrested. It was an interesting interview in more ways than one."

Again he fell silent, and Katherine did not interrupt his train of
thought.

"Mademoiselle," he said at last, "I am now on delicate ground, yet I
will say this to you. There is, I think, some one who loves Monsieur
Kettering--correct me if I am wrong--and for her sake--well--for her
sake I hope that I am right and the police are wrong. You know who that
some one is?"

There was a pause, then Katherine said:

"Yes--I think I know."

Poirot leant across the table towards her.

"I am not satisfied, Mademoiselle; no, I am not satisfied. The facts,
the main facts, led straight to Monsieur Kettering. But there is one
thing that has been left out of account."

"And what is that?"

"The disfigured face of the victim. I have asked myself, Mademoiselle,
a hundred times, 'Was Derek Kettering the kind of man who would deal
that smashing blow after having committed the murder?' What end would
it serve? What purpose would it accomplish? Was it a likely action for
one of Monsieur Kettering's temperament? And, Mademoiselle, the answer
to these questions is profoundly unsatisfactory. Again and again I go
back to that one point--'why?' And the only things I have to help me to
a solution of the problem are these."

He whipped out his pocket-book and extracted something from it which he
held between his finger and thumb.

"Do you remember, Mademoiselle? You saw me take these hairs from the
rug in the railway carriage."

Katherine leant forward, scrutinizing the hairs keenly.

Poirot nodded his head slowly several times.

"They suggest nothing to you, I see that, Mademoiselle. And yet--I
think somehow that you see a good deal."

"I have had ideas," said Katherine slowly, "curious ideas. That is why
I ask you what you were doing in Paris, Monsieur Poirot."

"When I wrote to you--"

"From the Ritz?"

A curious smile came over Poirot's face.

"Yes, as you say, from the Ritz. I am a luxurious person
sometimes--when a millionaire pays."

"The Russian Embassy," said Katherine, frowning. "No, I don't see where
that comes in."

"It does not come in directly, Mademoiselle. I went there to get
certain information. I saw a particular personage and I threatened
him--yes, Mademoiselle, I, Hercule Poirot, threatened him."

"With the police?"

"No," said Poirot drily, "with the Press--a much more deadly weapon."

He looked at Katherine and she smiled at him, just shaking her head.

"Are you not just turning back into an oyster again, Monsieur Poirot?"

"No, no! I do not wish to make mysteries. See, I will tell you
everything. I suspect this man of being the active party in the sale
of the jewels of Monsieur Van Aldin. I tax him with it, and in the end
I get the whole story out of him. I learn where the jewels were handed
over, and I learn, too, of the man who paced up and down outside in the
street--a man with a venerable head of white hair, but who walked with
the light, springy step of a young man--and I give that man a name in
my own mind--the name of 'Monsieur le Marquis.'"

"And now you have come to London to see Mr. Van Aldin?"

"Not entirely for that reason. I had other work to do. Since I have
been in London I have seen two more people--a theatrical agent and a
Harley Street doctor. From each of them I have got certain information.
Put these things together, Mademoiselle, and see if you can make of
them the same as I do."

"I?"

"Yes, you. I will tell you one thing, Mademoiselle. There has been a
doubt all along in my mind as to whether the robbery and the murder
were done by the same person. For a long time I was not sure--"

"And now?"

"And now I _know_."

There was a silence. Then Katherine lifted her head. Her eyes were
shining.

"I am not clever like you, Monsieur Poirot. Half the things that you
have been telling me don't seem to me to point anywhere at all. The
ideas that came to me came from such an entirely different angle--"

"Ah, but that is always so," said Poirot quietly. "A mirror shows the
truth, but every one stands in a different place for looking into the
mirror."

"My ideas may be absurd--they may be entirely different from yours,
but--"

"Yes?"

"Tell me, does this help you at all?"

He took a newspaper cutting from her outstretched hand. He read it and,
looking up, he nodded gravely.

"As I told you, Mademoiselle, one stands at a different angle for
looking into the mirror, but it is the same mirror and the same things
are reflected there."

Katherine got up. "I must rush," she said. "I have only just time to
catch my train. Monsieur Poirot--"

"Yes, Mademoiselle."

"It--it mustn't be much longer, you understand. I--I can't go on much
longer."

There was a break in her voice.

He patted her hand reassuringly.

"Courage, Mademoiselle, you must not fail now; the end is very near."




                           33. A New Theory


"Monsieur Poirot wants to see you, sir."

"Damn the fellow!" said Van Aldin.

Knighton remained sympathetically silent.

Van Aldin got up from his chair and paced up and down.

"I suppose you have seen the cursed newspapers this morning?"

"I have glanced at them, sir."

"Still at it hammer and tongs?"

"I am afraid so, sir."

The millionaire sat down again and pressed his hand to his forehead.

"If I had had an idea of this," he groaned. "I wish to God I had
never got that little Belgian to ferret out the truth. Find Ruth's
murderer--that was all I thought about."

"You wouldn't have liked your son-in-law to go scot free?"

Van Aldin sighed.

"I would have preferred to take the law into my own hands."

"I don't think that would have been a very wise proceeding, sir."

"All the same--are you sure the fellow wants to see me?"

"Yes, Mr. Van Aldin. He is very urgent about it."

"Then I suppose he will have to. He can come along this morning if he
likes."

It was a very fresh and debonair Poirot who was ushered in. He did
not seem to see any lack of cordiality in the millionaire's manner,
and chatted pleasantly about various trifles. He was in London, he
explained, to see his doctor. He mentioned the name of an eminent
surgeon.

"No, no, _pas la guerre_--a memory of my days in the police force, a
bullet of a rascally Apache."

He touched his left shoulder and winced realistically.

"I always consider you a lucky man, Monsieur Van Aldin; you are
not like our popular idea of American millionaires, martyrs to the
dyspepsia."

"I am pretty tough," said Van Aldin. "I lead a very simple life, you
know; plain fare and not too much of it."

"You have seen something of Miss Grey, have you not?" inquired Poirot,
innocently turning to the secretary.

"I--yes; once or twice," said Knighton.

He blushed slightly and Van Aldin exclaimed in surprise:

"Funny you never mentioned to me that you had seen her, Knighton?"

"I didn't think you would be interested, sir."

"I like that girl very much," said Van Aldin.

"It is a thousand pities that she should have buried herself once more
in St. Mary Mead," said Poirot.

"It is very fine of her," said Knighton hotly. "There are very
few people who would bury themselves down there to look after a
cantankerous old woman who has no earthly claim on her."

"I am silent," said Poirot, his eyes twinkling a little; "but all the
same I say it is a pity. And now, Messieurs, let us come to business."

Both the other men looked at him in some surprise.

"You must not be shocked or alarmed at what I am about to say.
Supposing, Monsieur Van Aldin, that, after all, Monsieur Derek
Kettering did not murder his wife?"

"What?"

Both men stared at him in blank surprise.

"Supposing, I say, that Monsieur Kettering did not murder his wife?"

"Are you mad, Monsieur Poirot?"

It was Van Aldin who spoke.

"No," said Poirot, "I am not mad. I am eccentric, perhaps--at least
certain people say so; but as regards my profession, I am very much, as
one says, 'all there.' I ask you, Monsieur Van Aldin, whether you would
be glad or sorry if what I tell you should be the case?"

Van Aldin stared at him.

"Naturally I should be glad," he said at last. "Is this an exercise in
suppositions, Monsieur Poirot, or are there any facts behind it?"

Poirot looked at the ceiling.

"There is an off-chance," he said quietly, "that it might be the Comte
de la Roche after all. At least I have succeeded in upsetting his
alibi."

"How did you manage that?"

Poirot shrugged his shoulders modestly.

"I have my own methods. The exercise of a little tact, a little
cleverness--and the thing is done."

"But the rubies," said Van Aldin, "these rubies that the Count had in
his possession were false."

"And clearly he would not have committed the crime except for the
rubies. But you are overlooking one point, Monsieur Van Aldin. Where
the rubies were concerned, some one might have been before him."

"But this is an entirely new theory," cried Knighton.

"Do you really believe all this rigmarole, Monsieur Poirot?" demanded
the millionaire.

"The thing is not proved," said Poirot quietly. "It is as yet only a
theory, but I tell you this, Monsieur Van Aldin, the facts are worth
investigating. You must come out with me to the south of France and go
into the case on the spot."

"You really think this is necessary--that I should go, I mean."

"I thought it would be what you yourself would wish," said Poirot.

There was a hint of reproach in his tone which was not lost upon the
other.

"Yes, yes, of course," he said. "When do you wish to start, Monsieur
Poirot?"

"You are very busy at present, sir," murmured Knighton.

But the millionaire had now made up his mind, and he waved the other's
objections aside.

"I guess this business comes first," he said. "All right, Monsieur
Poirot, to-morrow. What train?"

"We will go, I think, by the Blue Train," said Poirot, and he smiled.




                       34. The Blue Train Again


"The Millionaire's Train," as it is sometimes called, swung round a
curve of line at what seemed a dangerous speed. Van Aldin, Knighton,
and Poirot sat together in silence. Knighton and Van Aldin had two
compartments connecting with each other, as Ruth Kettering and her maid
had had on the fateful journey. Poirot's own compartment was further
along the coach.

The journey was a painful one for Van Aldin, recalling as it did the
most agonizing memories. Poirot and Knighton conversed occasionally in
low tones without disturbing him.

When, however, the train had completed its slow journey round the
_ceinture_ and reached the Gare de Lyon, Poirot became suddenly
galvanized into activity. Van Aldin realized that part of his object in
travelling by the train had been to attempt to reconstruct the crime.
Poirot himself acted every part. He was in turn the maid, hurriedly
shut into her own compartment, Mrs. Kettering, recognizing her husband
with surprise and a trace of anxiety, and Derek Kettering discovering
that his wife was travelling on the train. He tested various
possibilities, such as the best way for a person to conceal himself in
the second compartment.

Then suddenly an idea seemed to strike him. He clutched at Van Aldin's
arm.

"_Mon Dieu_, but that is something I have not thought of! We must break
our journey in Paris. Quick, quick, let us alight at once."

Seizing suit-cases he hurried from the train. Van Aldin and Knighton,
bewildered but obedient, followed him. Van Aldin having once formed his
opinion of Poirot's ability was slow to part from it. At the barrier
they were held up. Their tickets were in charge of the conductor of the
train, a fact which all three of them had forgotten.

Poirot's explanations were rapid, fluent, and impassioned, but they
produced no effect upon the stolid-faced official.

"Let us get quit of this," said Van Aldin abruptly. "I gather you are
in a hurry, Monsieur Poirot. For God's sake pay the fares from Calais
and let us get right on with whatever you have got in your mind."

But Poirot's flood of language had suddenly stopped dead, and he had
the appearance of a man turned to stone. His arm, still outflung in an
impassioned gesture, remained there as though stricken with paralysis.

"I have been an imbecile," he said simply. "_Ma foi_, I lose my
head nowadays. Let us return and continue our journey quietly. With
reasonable luck the train will not have gone."

They were only just in time, the train moving off as Knighton, the last
of the three, swung himself and his suitcase on board.

The conductor remonstrated with them feelingly, and assisted them to
carry their luggage back to their compartments. Van Aldin said nothing,
but he was clearly disgusted at Poirot's extraordinary conduct. Alone
with Knighton for a moment or two, he remarked:

"This is a wildgoose chase. The man has lost his grip on things. He has
got brains up to a point, but any man who loses his head and scuttles
round like a frightened rabbit is no earthly darned good."

Poirot came to them in a moment or two, full of abject apologies and
clearly so crestfallen that harsh words would have been superfluous.
Van Aldin received his apologies gravely, but managed to restrain
himself from making acid comments.

They had dinner on the train, and afterwards, somewhat to the surprise
of the other two, Poirot suggested that they should all three set up in
Van Aldin's compartment.

The millionaire looked at him curiously.

"Is there anything that you are keeping back from us, Monsieur Poirot?"

"I?" Poirot opened his eyes in innocent surprise. "But what an idea."

Van Aldin did not answer, but he was not satisfied. The conductor was
told that he need not make up the beds. Any surprise he might have felt
was obliterated by the largeness of the tip which Van Aldin handed to
him. The three men sat in silence. Poirot fidgeted and seemed restless.
Presently he turned to the secretary.

"Major Knighton, is the door of your compartment bolted? The door into
the corridor, I mean."

"Yes; I bolted it myself just now."

"Are you sure?" said Poirot.

"I will go and make sure, if you like," said Knighton smiling.

"No, no, do not derange yourself. I will see for myself."

He passed through the connecting door and returned in a second or two,
nodding his head.

"Yes, yes, it is as you said. You must pardon an old man's fussy ways."

He closed the connecting door and resumed his place in the right-hand
corner.

The hours passed. The three men dozed fitfully, waking with
uncomfortable starts. Probably never before had three people booked
berths on the most luxurious train available, then declined to avail
themselves of the accommodations they had paid for. Every now and then
Poirot glanced at his watch, and then nodded his head and composed
himself to slumber once more. On one occasion he rose from his seat
and opened the connecting door, peered sharply into the adjoining
compartment, and then returned to his seat, shaking his head.

"What is the matter?" whispered Knighton. "You are expecting something
to happen, aren't you?"

"I have the nerves," confessed Poirot. "I am like the cat upon the hot
tiles. Every little noise it makes me jump."

Knighton yawned.

"Of all the darned uncomfortable journeys," he murmured. "I suppose you
know what you are playing at, Monsieur Poirot."

He composed himself to sleep as best he could. Both he and Van Aldin
had succumbed to slumber, when Poirot, glancing for the fourteenth time
at his watch, leant across and tapped the millionaire on the shoulder.

"Eh? What is it?"

"In five or ten minutes, Monsieur, we shall arrive at Lyons."

"My God!" Van Aldin's face looked white and haggard in the dim light.
"Then it must have been about this time that poor Ruth was killed."

He sat staring straight in front of him. His lips twitched a little,
his mind reverting back to the terrible tragedy that had saddened his
life.

There was the usual long screaming sigh of the brake, and the train
slackened speed and drew into Lyons. Van Aldin let down the window and
leant out.

"If it wasn't Derek--if your new theory is correct, it is here that the
man left the train?" he asked over his shoulder.

Rather to his surprise Poirot shook his head.

"No," he said thoughtfully, "no _man_ left the train, but I think--yes,
I think, a _woman_ may have done so."

Knighton gave a gasp.

"A woman?" demanded Van Aldin sharply.

"Yes, a woman," said Poirot, nodding his head. "You may not remember,
Monsieur Van Aldin, but Miss Grey in her evidence mentioned that a
youth in a cap and overcoat descended on to the platform ostensibly
to stretch his legs. Me, I think that that youth was most probably a
woman."

"But who was she?"

Van Aldin's face expressed incredulity, but Poirot replied seriously
and categorically.

"Her name--or the name under which she was known, for many years--is
Kitty Kidd, but you, Monsieur Van Aldin, knew her by another
name--_that of Ada Mason_."

Knighton sprang to his feet.

"What?" he cried.

Poirot swung round to him.

"Ah!--before I forget it." He whipped something from a pocket and held
it out.

"Permit me to offer you a cigarette--out of your own cigarette case.
It was careless of you to drop it when you boarded the train on the
_ceinture_ at Paris."

Knighton stood staring at him as though stupefied. Then he made a
movement, but Poirot flung up his hand in a warning gesture.

"No, don't move," he said in a silky voice; "the door into the next
compartment is open, and you are being covered from there this
minute. I unbolted the door into the corridor when we left Paris,
and our friends the police were told to take their places there. As
I expect you know, the French police want you rather urgently, Major
Knighton--or shall we say--Monsieur le Marquis?"




                           35. Explanations


"Explanations?"

Poirot smiled. He was sitting opposite the millionaire at a luncheon
table in the latter's private suite at the Negresco. Facing him was a
relieved but very puzzled man. Poirot leant back in his chair, lit one
of his tiny cigarettes, and stared reflectively at the ceiling.

"Yes, I will give you explanations. It began with the one point that
puzzled me. You know what that point was? _The disfigured face._ It is
not an uncommon thing to find when investigating a crime and it rouses
an immediate question, the question of identity. That naturally was
the first thing that occurred to me. Was the dead woman really Mrs.
Kettering? But that line led me nowhere, for Miss Grey's evidence was
positive and very reliable, so I put that idea aside. The dead woman
_was_ Ruth Kettering."

"When did you first begin to suspect the maid?"

"Not for some time, but one peculiar little point drew my attention to
her. The cigarette case found in the railway carriage and which she
told us was one which Mrs. Kettering had given to her husband. Now that
was, on the face of it, most improbable, seeing the terms that they
were on. It awakened a doubt in my mind as to the general veracity of
Ada Mason's statements. There was the rather suspicious fact to be
taken into consideration, that she had only been with her mistress for
two months. Certainly it did not seem as if she could have had anything
to do with the crime since she had been left behind in Paris and Mrs.
Kettering had been seen alive by several people afterwards, but--"

Poirot leant forward. He raised an emphatic forefinger and wagged it
with intense emphasis at Van Aldin.

"But I am a good detective. I suspect. There is nobody and nothing that
I do not suspect. I believe nothing that I am told. I say to myself:
how do we know that Ada Mason was left behind in Paris? And at first
the answer to that question seemed completely satisfactory. There was
the evidence of your secretary, Major Knighton, a complete outsider
whose testimony might be supposed to be entirely impartial, and there
was the dead woman's own words to the conductor on the train. But I put
the latter point aside for the moment, because a very curious idea--an
idea perhaps fantastic and impossible--was growing up in my mind. If
by any outside chance it happened to be true, that particular piece of
testimony was worthless.

"I concentrated on the chief stumbling-block to my theory, Major
Knighton's statement that he saw Ada Mason at the Ritz after the
Blue Train had left Paris. That seemed conclusive enough, but yet,
on examining the facts carefully, I noted two things. First, that
by a curious coincidence he, too, had been exactly two months in
your service. Secondly, his initial letter was the same--'K.'
Supposing--just supposing--that it was _his_ cigarette case which had
been found in the carriage. Then, if Ada Mason and he were working
together, and she recognized it when we showed it to her, would she
not act precisely as she had done? At first, taken aback, she quickly
evolved a plausible theory that would agree with Mr. Kettering's
guilt. _Bien entendu_, that was not the original idea. The Comte de
la Roche was to be the scapegoat, though Ada Mason would not make her
recognition of him too certain, in case he should be able to prove an
alibi. Now, if you will cast your mind back to that time, you will
remember a significant thing that happened. I suggested to Ada Mason
that the man she had seen was not the Comte de la Roche, but Derek
Kettering. She seemed uncertain at the time, but after I had got back
to my hotel you rang me up and told me that she had come to you and
said that, on thinking it over, she was now quite convinced that the
man in question _was_ Mr. Kettering. I had been expecting something of
the kind. There could be but one explanation of this sudden certainty
on her part. After my leaving your hotel, she had had time to consult
with somebody, and had received instructions which she acted upon.
Who had given her these instructions? Major Knighton. And there was
another very small point, which might mean nothing or might mean a
great deal. In casual conversation Knighton had talked of a jewel
robbery in Yorkshire in a house where he was staying. Perhaps a mere
coincidence--perhaps another small link in the chain."

"But there is one thing I do not understand, Monsieur Poirot. I guess I
must be dense or I would have seen it before now. Who was the man in
the train at Paris? Derek Kettering or the Comte de la Roche?"

"That is the simplicity of the whole thing. _There was no man._
Ah--_mille tonnerres!_--do you not see the cleverness of it all? Whose
word have we for it that there ever was a man there? Only Ada Mason's.
And we believe in Ada Mason because of Knighton's evidence that she was
left behind in Paris."

"But Ruth herself told the conductor that she had left her maid behind
there," demurred Van Aldin.

"Ah! I am coming to that. We have Mrs. Kettering's own evidence there,
but, on the other hand, we have not really got her evidence, because,
Monsieur Van Aldin, a dead woman cannot give evidence. It is not _her_
evidence, but the evidence of the conductor of the train--a very
different affair altogether."

"So you think the man was lying?"

"No, no, not at all. He spoke what he thought to be the truth. But the
woman who told him that she had left her maid in Paris was not Mrs.
Kettering."

Van Aldin stared at him.

"Monsieur Van Aldin, Ruth Kettering was dead before the train arrived
at the Gare de Lyon. It was Ada Mason, dressed in her mistress's very
distinctive clothing, who purchased a dinner basket and who made that
very necessary statement to the conductor."

"Impossible!"

"No, no, Monsieur Van Aldin; not impossible. _Les femmes_, they look
so much alike nowadays that one identifies them more by their clothing
than by their faces. Ada Mason was the same height as your daughter.
Dressed in that very sumptuous fur coat and the little red lacquer hat
jammed down over her eyes, with just a bunch of auburn curls showing
over each ear, it was no wonder that the conductor was deceived. He
had not previously spoken to Mrs. Kettering, you remember. True, he
had seen the maid just for a moment when she handed him the tickets,
but his impression had been merely that of a gaunt, black-clad female.
If he had been an unusually intelligent man, he might have gone so far
as to say that mistress and maid were not unlike, but it is extremely
unlikely that he would even think that. And remember, Ada Mason, or
Kitty Kidd, was an actress, able to change her appearance and tone
of voice at a moment's notice. No, no; there was no danger of his
recognizing the maid in the mistress's clothing, but there _was_ the
danger that when he came to discover the body he might realize it was
not the woman he had talked to the night before. And now we see the
reason for the disfigured face. The chief danger that Ada Mason ran was
that Katherine Grey might visit her compartment after the train left
Paris, and she provided against that difficulty by ordering a dinner
basket and by locking herself in her compartment."

"But who killed Ruth--and when?"

"First, bear it in mind that the crime was planned and undertaken by
the two of them--Knighton and Ada Mason, working together. Knighton
was in Paris that day on your business. He boarded the train somewhere
on its way round the _ceinture_. Mrs. Kettering would be surprised,
but she would be quite unsuspicious. Perhaps he draws her attention to
something out the window, and as she turns to look he slips the cord
round her neck--and the whole thing is over in a second or two. The
door of the compartment is locked, and he and Ada Mason set to work.
They strip off the dead woman's outer clothes. Mason and Knighton
roll the body up in a rug and put it on the seat in the adjoining
compartment amongst the bags and suit-cases. Knighton drops off the
train, taking the jewel-case containing the rubies with him. Since the
crime is not supposed to have been committed until nearly twelve hours
later he is perfectly safe, and his evidence and the supposed Mrs.
Kettering's words to the conductor will provide a perfect alibi for his
accomplice.

"At the Gare de Lyon Ada Mason gets a dinner basket, and shutting
herself into the toilet compartment she quickly changes into her
mistress's clothes, adjusts two false bunches of auburn curls, and
generally makes up to resemble her as closely as possible. When the
conductor comes to make up the bed, she tells him the prepared story
about having left her maid behind in Paris; and whilst he is making up
the berth, she stands looking out of the window, so that her back is
towards the corridor and people passing along there. That was a wise
precaution, because, as we know, Miss Grey was one of those passing,
and she, among others, was willing to swear that Mrs. Kettering was
still alive at that hour."

"Go on," said Van Aldin.

"Before getting to Lyons, Ada Mason arranged her mistress's body in
the bunk, folded up the dead woman's clothes neatly on the end of it,
and herself changed into a man's clothes and prepared to leave the
train. When Derek Kettering entered his wife's compartment, and, as
he thought, saw her asleep in her berth, the scene had been set, and
Ada Mason was hidden in the next compartment waiting for the moment to
leave the train unobserved. As soon as the conductor had swung himself
down on to the platform at Lyons, she follows, slouching along as
though just taking a breath of air. At a moment when she is unobserved,
she hurriedly crosses to the other platform, and takes the first train
back to Paris and the Ritz Hotel. Her name has been registered there as
taking a room the night before by one of Knighton's female accomplices.
She has nothing to do but wait there placidly for your arrival. The
jewels are not, and never have been, in her possession. No suspicion
attaches to him, and, as your secretary, he brings them to Nice
without the least fear of discovery. Their delivery there to Monsieur
Papopolous is already arranged for and they are entrusted to Mason at
the last moment to hand over to the Greek. Altogether a very neatly
planned coup, as one would expect from a master of the game such as the
Marquis."

"And you honestly mean that Richard Knighton is a well-known criminal,
who has been at this business for years?"

Poirot nodded.

"One of the chief assets of the gentleman called the Marquis was
his plausible, ingratiating manner. You fell a victim to his charm,
Monsieur Van Aldin, when you engaged him as a secretary on such a
slight acquaintanceship."

"I could have sworn that he never angled for the post," cried the
millionaire.

"It was very astutely done--so astutely done that it deceived a man
whose knowledge of other men is as great as yours is."

"I looked up his antecedents too. The fellow's record was excellent."

"Yes, yes; that was part of the game. As Richard Knighton his life
was quite free from reproach. He was well born, well connected, did
honourable service in the War, and seemed altogether above suspicion;
but when I came to glean information about the mysterious Marquis,
I found many points of similarity. Knighton spoke French like a
Frenchman, he had been in America, France, and England at much the
same time as the Marquis was operating. The Marquis was last heard
of as engineering various jewel robberies in Switzerland, and it was
in Switzerland that you had come across Major Knighton; and it was at
precisely that time that the first rumours were going round of your
being in treaty for the famous rubies."

"But why murder?" murmured Van Aldin brokenly. "Surely a clever thief
could have stolen the jewels without running his head into a noose."

Poirot shook his head. "This is not the first murder that lies to the
Marquis's charge. He is a killer by instinct; he believes, too, in
leaving no evidence behind him. Dead men and women tell no tales.

"The Marquis had an intense passion for famous and historical jewels.
He laid his plans far beforehand by installing himself as your
secretary and getting his accomplice to obtain the situation of maid
with your daughter, for whom he guessed the jewels were destined.
And, though this was his matured and carefully thought-out plan, he
did not scruple to attempt a shortcut by hiring a couple of Apaches
to waylay you in Paris on the night you bought the jewels. That plan
failed, which hardly surprised him, I think. This plan was, so he
thought, completely safe. No possible suspicion could attach to Richard
Knighton. But like all great men--and the Marquis was a great man--he
had his weaknesses. He fell genuinely in love with Miss Grey, and
suspecting her liking for Derek Kettering, he could not resist the
temptation to saddle him with the crime when the opportunity presented
itself. And now, Monsieur Van Aldin, I am going to tell you something
very curious. Miss Grey is not a fanciful woman by any means, yet she
firmly believes that she felt your daughter's presence beside her one
day in the Casino Gardens at Monte Carlo, just after she had been
having a long talk with Knighton. She was convinced, she says, that the
dead woman was urgently trying to tell her something, and it suddenly
came to her that what the dead woman was trying to say was that
Knighton was her murderer! The idea seemed so fantastic at the time
that Miss Grey spoke of it to no one. But she was so convinced of its
truth that she acted on it--wild as it seemed. She did not discourage
Knighton's advances, and she pretended to him that she was convinced of
Derek Kettering's guilt."

"Extraordinary," said Van Aldin.

"Yes, it is very strange. One cannot explain these things. Oh, by the
way, there is one little point that baffled me considerably. Your
secretary has a decided limp--the result of a wound that he received
in the War. Now the Marquis most decidedly did not limp. That was a
stumbling-block. But Miss Lenox Tamplin happened to mention one day
that Knighton's limp had been a surprise to the surgeons who had
been in charge of the case in her mother's hospital. That suggested
camouflage. When I was in London I went to the surgeon in question, and
I got several technical details from him which confirmed me in that
belief. I mentioned the name of that surgeon in Knighton's hearing the
day before yesterday. The natural thing would have been for Knighton to
mention that he had been attended by him during the War, but he said
nothing--and that little point, if nothing else, gave me the last final
assurance that my theory of the crime was correct. Miss Grey, too,
provided me with a cutting, showing that there had been a robbery at
Lady Tamplin's hospital during the time that Knighton had been there.
She realized that I was on the same track as herself when I wrote to
her from the Ritz in Paris.

"I had some trouble in my inquiries there, but I got what I
wanted--evidence that Ada Mason arrived on the morning after the crime
and not on the evening of the day before."

There was a long silence, then the millionaire stretched out a hand to
Poirot across the table.

"I guess you know what this means to me, Monsieur Poirot," he said
huskily. "I am sending you round a cheque in the morning, but no cheque
in the world will express what I feel about what you have done for me.
You are the goods, Monsieur Poirot. Every time, you are the goods."

Poirot rose to his feet; his chest swelled.

"I am only Hercule Poirot," he said modestly, "yet, as you say, in my
own way I am a big man, even as you also are a big man. I am glad and
happy to have been of service to you. Now I go to repair the damages
caused by travel. Alas! my excellent Georges is not with me."

In the lounge of the hotel he encountered a friend--the venerable
Monsieur Papopolous, his daughter Zia beside him.

"I thought you had left Nice, Monsieur Poirot," murmured the Greek as
he took the detective's affectionately proffered hand.

"Business compelled me to return, my dear Monsieur Papopolous."

"Business?"

"Yes, business. And talking of business, I hope your health is better,
my dear friend?"

"Much better. In fact, we are returning to Paris to-morrow."

"I am enchanted to hear such good news. You have not completely ruined
the Greek ex-Minister, I hope."

"I?"

"I understand you sold him a very wonderful ruby which--strictly _entre
nous_--is being worn by Mademoiselle Mirelle, the dancer?"

"Yes," murmured Monsieur Papopolous; "yes, that is so."

"A ruby not unlike the famous 'Heart of Fire'."

"It has points of resemblance, certainly," said the Greek casually.

"You have a wonderful hand with jewels, Monsieur Papopolous. I
congratulate you. Mademoiselle Zia, I am desolate that you are
returning to Paris so speedily. I had hoped to see some more of you now
that my business is accomplished."

"Would one be indiscreet if one asked what that business was?" asked
Monsieur Papopolous.

"Not at all, not at all. I have just succeeded in laying the Marquis by
the heels."

A far-away look came over Monsieur Papopolous' noble countenance.

"The Marquis?" he murmured; "now why does that seem familiar to me?
No--I cannot recall it."

"You would not, I am sure," said Poirot. "I refer to a very notable
criminal and jewel robber. He has just been arrested for the murder of
the English lady, Madame Kettering."

"Indeed? How interesting these things are!"

A polite exchange of farewells followed, and when Poirot was out of
earshot, Monsieur Papopolous turned to his daughter.

"Zia," he said, with feeling, "that man is the devil!"

"I like him."

"I like him myself," admitted Monsieur Papopolous. "But he is the
devil, all the same."




                            36. By the Sea


The mimosa was nearly over. The scent of it in the air was faintly
unpleasant. There were pink geraniums twining along the balustrade of
Lady Tamplin's villa, and masses of carnations below sent up a sweet,
heavy perfume. The Mediterranean was at its bluest. Poirot sat on the
terrace with Lenox Tamplin. He had just finished telling her the same
story he had told to Van Aldin two days before. Lenox had listened to
him with absorbed attention, her brows knitted and her eyes sombre.

When he had finished she said simply:

"And Derek?"

"He was released yesterday."

"And he has gone--where?"

"He left Nice last night."

"For St. Mary Mead?"

"Yes, for St. Mary Mead."

There was a pause.

"I was wrong about Katherine," said Lenox. "I thought she did not care."

"She is very reserved. She trusts no one."

"She might have trusted me," said Lenox, with a shade of bitterness.

"Yes," said Poirot gravely, "she might have trusted you. But
Mademoiselle Katherine has spent a great deal of her life listening,
and those who have listened do not find it easy to talk; they keep
their sorrows and joys to themselves and tell no one."

"I was a fool," said Lenox; "I thought she really cared for Knighton.
I ought to have known better. I suppose I thought so because--well, I
hoped so."

Poirot took her hand and gave it a little friendly squeeze. "Courage,
Mademoiselle," he said gently.

Lenox looked very straight out across the sea, and her face, in its
ugly rigidity, had for the moment a tragic beauty.

"Oh, well," she said at last, "it would not have done. I am too young
for Derek; he is like a kid that has never grown up. He wants the
Madonna touch."

There was a long silence, then Lenox turned to him quickly and
impulsively. "But I _did_ help, Monsieur Poirot--at any rate I did
help."

"Yes, Mademoiselle. It was you who gave me the first inkling of the
truth when you said that the person who committed the crime need not
have been on the train at all. Before that, I could not see how the
thing had been done."

Lenox drew a deep breath.

"I am glad," she said; "at any rate--that is something."

From far behind them there came a long-drawn-out scream of an engine's
whistle.

"That is that damned Blue Train," said Lenox. "Trains are relentless
things, aren't they, Monsieur Poirot? People are murdered and die, but
they go on just the same. I am talking nonsense, but you know what I
mean."

"Yes, yes, I know. Life is like a train, Mademoiselle. It goes on. And
it is a good thing that that is so."

"Why?"

"Because the train gets to its journey's end at last, and there is a
proverb about that in your language, Mademoiselle."

"'Journeys end in lovers meeting.'" Lenox laughed. "That is not going
to be true for me."

"Yes--yes, it is true. You are young, younger than you yourself know.
Trust the train, Mademoiselle, for it is _le bon Dieu_ who drives it."

The whistle of the engine came again.

"Trust the train, Mademoiselle," murmured Poirot again. "And trust
Hercule Poirot. He knows."





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERY OF THE BLUE TRAIN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Plymouth Express Affair
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Plymouth Express Affair

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: October 2, 2021 [eBook #66446]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Consolidated Magazines Corporation (The Blue Book Magazine), 1923

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLYMOUTH EXPRESS AFFAIR ***

[Illustration]

                     THE PLYMOUTH EXPRESS AFFAIR

    “The little gray cells,” so often referred to by the great
    detective Hercule Poirot, certainly get in their fine-work
    in this intriguing mystery story by an exceptionally
    talented writer.

                          By Agatha Christie


Alec Simpson, R. N., stepped from the platform at Newton Abbot into a
first-class compartment of the Plymouth Express. A porter followed him
with a heavy suitcase. He was about to swing it up to the rack, but
the young sailor stopped him.

“No—leave it on the seat. I’ll put it up later. Here you are.”

“Thank you, sir.” The porter, generously tipped, withdrew.

Doors banged; a stentorian voice shouted: “Plymouth only. Change for
Torquay. Plymouth next stop.” Then a whistle blew, and the train drew
slowly out of the station.

Lieutenant Simpson had the carriage to himself. The December air was
chilly, and he pulled up the window. Then he sniffed vaguely, and
frowned. What a smell there was! Reminded him of that time in
hospital, and the operation on his leg. Yes, chloroform; that was it!

He let the window down again, changing his seat to one with its back
to the engine. He pulled a pipe out of his pocket and lit it. For a
little time he sat inactive, looking out into the night and smoking.

At last he roused himself, and opening the suitcase, took out some
papers and magazines, then closed the suitcase again and endeavored to
shove it under the opposite seat—without success. Some hidden obstacle
resisted it. He shoved harder with rising impatience, but it still
stuck out halfway into the carriage.

“Why the devil wont it go in?” he muttered, and hauling it out
completely, he stooped down and peered under the seat....

A moment later a cry rang out into the night, and the great train came
to an unwilling halt in obedience to the imperative jerking of the
communication-cord.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Mon ami,” said Poirot. “You have, I know, been deeply interested in
this mystery of the Plymouth Express. Read this.”

I picked up the note he flicked across the table to me. It was brief
and to the point.

    Dear Sir:

    I shall be obliged if you will call upon me at your
    earliest convenience.

                                Yours faithfully,
                                      Ebenezer Halliday.

The connection was not clear to my mind, and I looked inquiringly at
Poirot. For answer he took up the newspaper and read aloud:

“‘A sensational discovery was made last night. A young naval officer
returning to Plymouth found under the seat of his compartment, the
body of a woman, stabbed through the heart. The officer at once pulled
the communication-cord, and the train was brought to a standstill. The
woman who was about thirty years of age, and richly dressed, has not
yet been identified.’

“And later we have this: ‘The woman found dead in the Plymouth Express
has been identified as the Honorable Mrs. Rupert Carrington.’ You see
now, my friend? Or if you do not, I will add this. Mrs. Rupert
Carrington was, before her marriage, Flossie Halliday, daughter of old
man Halliday, the steel king of America.”

“And he has sent for you? Splendid!”

“I did him a little service in the past—an affair of bearer bonds. And
once, when I was in Paris for a royal visit, I had Mademoiselle
Flossie pointed out to me. _La jolie petite pensionnaire!_ She had the
_jolie dot_ too! It caused trouble. She nearly made a bad affair.”

“How was that?”

“A certain Count de la Rochefour. _Un bien mauvais sujet!_ A bad hat,
as you would say. An adventurer pure and simple, who knew how to
appeal to a romantic young girl. Luckily her father got wind of it in
time. He took her back to America in haste. I heard of her marriage
some years later, but I know nothing of her husband.”

“H’m,” I said. “The Honorable Rupert Carrington is no beauty, by all
accounts. He’d pretty well run through his own money on the turf, and
I should imagine old man Halliday’s dollars came along in the nick of
time. I should say that for a good-looking, well-mannered, utterly
unscrupulous young scoundrel, it would be hard to find his match!”

“Ah, the poor little lady! _Elle n’est pas bien tombée!_”

“I fancy he made it pretty obvious at once that it was her money, and
not she, that had attracted him. I believe they drifted apart almost
at once. I have heard rumors lately that there was to be a definite
legal separation.”

“Old man Halliday is no fool. He would tie up her money pretty tight.”

“I dare say. Anyway, I know as a fact that the Honorable Rupert is
said to be extremely hard up.”

“Ah-ha! I wonder—”

“You wonder what?”

“My good friend, do not jump down my throat like that. You are
interested, I see. Supposing you accompany me to see Mr. Halliday.
There is a taxi stand at the corner.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

A very few minutes sufficed to whirl us to the superb house in Park
Lane rented by the American magnate. We were shown into the library,
and almost immediately we were joined by a large, stout man, with
piercing eyes and an aggressive chin.

“M. Poirot?” said Mr. Halliday. “I guess I don’t need to tell you what
I want you for. You’ve read the papers, and I’m never one to let the
grass grow under my feet. I happened to hear you were in London, and I
remembered the good work you did over those bonds. Never forget a
name. I’ve got the pick of Scotland Yard, but I’ll have my own man as
well. Money no object. All the dollars were made for my little
girl—and now she’s gone, I’ll spend my last cent to catch the damned
scoundrel that did it! See? So it’s up to you to deliver the goods.”

Poirot bowed.

“I accept, monsieur, all the more willingly that I saw your daughter
in Paris several times. And now I will ask you to tell me the
circumstances of her journey to Plymouth and any other details that
seem to you to bear upon the case.”

“Well, to begin with,” responded Halliday, “she wasn’t going to
Plymouth. She was going to join a house-party at Avonmead Court, the
Duchess of Swansea’s place. She left London by the twelve-fourteen
from Paddington, arriving at Bristol (where she had to change) at
two-fifty. The principal Plymouth expresses, of course, run via
Westbury, and do not go near Bristol at all. The twelve-fourteen does
a nonstop run to Bristol, afterward stopping at Weston, Taunton,
Exeter and Newton Abbot. My daughter traveled alone in her carriage,
which was reserved as far as Bristol, her maid being in a third-class
carriage in the next coach.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Poirot nodded, and Mr. Halliday went on: “The party at Avonmead Court
was to be a very gay one, with several balls, and in consequence my
daughter had with her nearly all her jewels—amounting in value
perhaps, to about a hundred thousand dollars.”

“_Un moment_,” interrupted Poirot. “Who had charge of the jewels? Your
daughter, or the maid?”

“My daughter always took charge of them herself, carrying them in a
small blue morocco case.”

“Continue, monsieur.”

“At Bristol the maid, Jane Mason, collected her mistress’ dressing-bag
and wraps, which were with her, and came to the door of Flossie’s
compartment. To her intense surprise, my daughter told her that she
was not getting out at Bristol, but was going on farther. She directed
Mason to get out the luggage and put it in the cloak-room. She could
have tea in the refreshment-room, but she was to wait at the station
for her mistress, who would return to Bristol by an up-train in the
course of the afternoon. The maid, although very much astonished, did
as she was told. She put the luggage in the cloak-room and had some
tea. But up-train after up-train came in, and her mistress did not
appear. After the arrival of the last train, she left the luggage
where it was, and went to a hotel near the station for the night. This
morning she read of the tragedy, and returned to town by the first
available train.”

“Is there nothing to account for your daughter’s sudden change of
plan?”

“Well, there is this: According to Jane Mason, at Bristol, Flossie was
no longer alone in her carriage. There was a man in it who stood
looking out of the farther window so that she could not see his face.”

“The train was a corridor one, of course?”

“Yes.”

“Which side was the corridor?”

“On the platform side. My daughter was standing in the corridor as she
talked to Mason.”

“And there is no doubt in your mind—excuse me!” He got up, and
carefully straightened the inkstand which was a little askew. “_Je
vous demande pardon_,” he continued, reseating himself. “It affects my
nerves to see anything crooked. Strange, is it not? I was saying,
monsieur, that there is no doubt in your mind, as to this probably
unexpected meeting being the cause of your daughter’s sudden change of
plan?”

“It seems the only reasonable supposition.”

“You have no idea as to who the gentleman in question might be?”

The millionaire hesitated for a moment, and then replied.

“No—I do not know at all.”

“Now—as to the discovery of the body?”

“It was discovered by a young naval officer who at once gave the
alarm. There was a doctor on the train. He examined the body. She had
been first chloroformed, and then stabbed. He gave it as his opinion
that she had been dead about four hours, so it must have been done not
long after leaving Bristol. —Probably between there and Weston,
possibly between Weston and Taunton.”

“And the jewel-case.”

“The jewel-case, M. Poirot, was missing.”

“One thing more, monsieur. Your daughter’s fortune—to whom does it
pass at her death?”

“Flossie made a will soon after her marriage, leaving everything to
her husband.” He hesitated for a minute, and then went on: “I may as
well tell you, Monsieur Poirot, that I regard my son-in-law as an
unprincipled scoundrel, and that, by my advice, my daughter was on the
eve of freeing herself from him by legal means—no difficult matter. I
settled her money upon her in such a way that he could not touch it
during her lifetime, but although they have lived entirely apart for
some years, she has frequently acceded to his demands for money,
rather than face an open scandal. However, I was determined to put an
end to this, and at last Flossie agreed, and my lawyers were
instructed to take proceedings.”

“And where is Monsieur Carrington?”

“In town. I believe he was away in the country yesterday, but he
returned last night.”

Poirot considered a little while. Then he said: “I think that is all,
monsieur.”

“You would like to see the maid, Jane Mason?”

“If you please.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Halliday rang the bell, and gave a short order to the footman. A few
minutes later Jane Mason entered the room, a respectable,
hard-featured woman, as emotionless in the face of tragedy as only a
good servant can be.

“You will permit me to put a few questions? Your mistress, she was
quite as usual before starting yesterday morning? Not excited or
flurried?”

“Oh, no sir!”

“But at Bristol she was quite different?”

“Yes sir, regular upset—so nervous she didn’t seem to know what she
was saying.”

“What did she say exactly?”

“Well sir, as near as I can remember, she said: ‘Mason, I’ve got to
alter my plans. Something has happened—I mean, I’m not getting out
here after all. I must go on. Get out the luggage and put it in the
cloak-room; then have some tea, and wait for me in the station.’

“‘Wait for you here, ma’am?’ I asked.

“‘Yes, yes. Don’t leave the station. I shall return by a later train.
I don’t know when. It mayn’t be until quite late.’

“‘Very well, ma’am,’ I says. It wasn’t my place to ask questions, but
I thought it very strange.”

“It was unlike your mistress, eh?”

“Very unlike her, sir.”

“What did you think?”

“Well sir, I thought it was to do with the gentleman in the carriage.
She didn’t speak to him, but she turned round once or twice as though
to ask him if she was doing right.”

“But you didn’t see the gentleman’s face?”

“No sir; he stood with his back to me all the time.”

“Can you describe him at all?”

“He had on a light fawn overcoat, and a traveling cap. He was tall and
slender, like, and the back of his head was dark.”

“You didn’t know him?”

“Oh, no, I don’t think so, sir.”

“It was not your master, Mr. Carrington, by any chance?”

Mason looked rather startled.

“Oh! I don’t think so, sir!”

“But you are not _sure_?”

“It was about the master’s build, sir—but I never thought of it being
him. We so seldom saw him. I couldn’t say it _wasn’t_ him!”

Poirot picked up a pin from the carpet, and frowned at it severely;
then he continued: “Would it be possible for the man to have entered
the train at Bristol before you reached the carriage?”

Mason considered.

“Yes sir, I think it would. My compartment was very crowded, and it
was some minutes before I could get out—and then there was a very
large crowd on the platform, and that delayed me too. But he’d only
have had a minute or two to speak to the mistress, that way. I took it
for granted that he’d come along the corridor.”

“That is more probable, certainly.”

He paused, still frowning.

“You know how the mistress was dressed, sir?”

“The papers give a few details, but I would like you to confirm them.”

“She was wearing a white fox fur toque, sir, with a white spotted
veil, and a blue frieze coat and skirt—the shade of blue they call
electric.”

“H’m, rather striking.”

“Yes,” remarked Halliday. “Inspector Japp is in hopes that that may
help us to fix the spot where the crime took place. Anyone who saw her
would remember her.”

“_Précisément!_ —Thank you, mademoiselle.” The maid left the room.

“Well!” Poirot got up briskly. “That is all I can do here—except,
monsieur, that I would ask you to tell me everything—but
_everything_!”

“I have done so.”

“You are sure?”

“Absolutely.”

“Then there is nothing more to be said. I must decline the case.”

“Why?”

“Because you have not been frank with me.”

“I assure you—”

“No, you are keeping something back.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

There was a moment’s pause, and then Halliday drew a paper from his
pocket and handed it to my friend.

“I guess that’s what you’re after, Monsieur Poirot—though how you know
about it fairly gets my goat!”

Poirot smiled, and unfolded the paper. It was a letter written in thin
sloping handwriting. Poirot read it aloud.

    “‘Chère Madame:

    “‘It is with infinite pleasure that I look forward to the
    felicity of meeting you again. After your so amiable reply to
    my letter, I can hardly restrain my impatience. I have never
    forgotten those days in Paris. It is most cruel that you
    should be leaving London tomorrow. However, before very long,
    and perhaps sooner than you think, I shall have the joy of
    beholding once more the lady whose image has ever reigned
    supreme in my heart.

    “‘Believe, chère madame, all the assurances of my most devoted
    and unaltered sentiments—

                                        “‘Armand de la Rochefour.’”

Poirot handed the letter back to Halliday with a bow.

“I fancy, monsieur, that you did not know that your daughter intended
renewing her acquaintance with the Count de la Rochefour?”

“It came as a thunderbolt to me! I found this letter in my daughter’s
handbag. As you probably know, Monsieur Poirot, this so-called count
is an adventurer of the worst type.”

Poirot nodded.

“But what I want to know is how you knew of the existence of this
letter?”

My friend smiled. “Monsieur, I did not. But to track footmarks, and
recognize cigarette-ash is not sufficient for a detective. He must
also be a good psychologist! I knew that you disliked and mistrusted
your son-in-law. He benefits by your daughter’s death; the maid’s
description of the mysterious man bears a sufficient resemblance to
him. Yet you are not keen on his track! Why? Surely because your
suspicions lie in another direction. Therefore you were keeping
something back.”

“You’re right, Monsieur Poirot. I was sure of Rupert’s guilt until I
found this letter. It unsettled me horribly.”

“Yes. The Count says: ‘Before very long, and perhaps sooner than you
think.’ Obviously he would not want to wait until you should get wind
of his reappearance. Was it he who traveled down from London by the
twelve-fourteen, and came along the corridor to your daughter’s
compartment? The Count de la Rochefour is also, if I remember rightly,
tall and dark!”

The millionaire nodded.

“Well, monsieur, I will wish you good day. Scotland Yard, has, I
presume, a list of the jewels?”

“Yes, I believe Inspector Japp is here now if you would like to see
him.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Japp was an old friend of ours, and greeted Poirot with a sort of
affectionate contempt.

“And how are you, monsieur? No bad feeling between us, though we
_have_ got our different ways of looking at things. How are the
‘little gray cells,’ eh? Going strong?”

Poirot beamed upon him. “They function, my good Japp; assuredly they
do!”

“Then that’s all right. Think it was the Honorable Rupert, or a crook?
We’re keeping an eye on all the regular places, of course. We shall
know if the shiners are disposed of, and of course whoever did it
isn’t going to keep them to admire their sparkle. Not likely! I’m
trying to find out where Rupert Carrington was yesterday. Seems a bit
of a mystery about it. I’ve got a man watching him.”

“A great precaution, but perhaps a day late,” suggested Poirot gently.

“You always will have your joke, Monsieur Poirot. Well, I’m off to
Paddington. Bristol, Weston, Taunton, that’s my beat. So long.”

“You will come round and see me this evening, and tell me the result?”

“Sure thing, if I’m back.”

“That good Inspector believes in matter in motion,” murmured Poirot as
our friend departed. “He travels; he measures footprints; he collects
mud and cigarette-ash! He is extremely busy! He is zealous beyond
words! And if I mentioned psychology to him, do you know what he would
do, my friend? He would smile! He would say to himself: ‘Poor old
Poirot! He ages! He grows senile!’ Japp is the ‘younger generation
knocking on the door.’ And _ma foi!_ They are so busy knocking that
they do not notice that the door is open!”

“And what are you going to do?”

“As we have _carte blanche_, I shall expend threepence in ringing up
the Ritz—where you may have noticed our Count is staying. After that,
as my feet are a little damp, and I have sneezed twice, I shall return
to my rooms and make myself a _tisano_ over the spirit lamp!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

I did not see Poirot again until the following morning. I found him
placidly finishing his breakfast.

“Well?” I inquired eagerly. “What has happened?”

“Nothing.”

“But Japp?”

“I have not seen him.”

“The Count?”

“He left the Ritz the day before yesterday.”

“The day of the murder?”

“Yes.”

“Then that settles it! Rupert Carrington is cleared.”

“Because the Count de la Rochefour has left the Ritz? You go too fast,
my friend.”

“Anyway, he must be followed, arrested! But what could be his motive?”

“One hundred thousand dollars’ worth of jewelry is a very good motive
for anyone. No, the question to my mind is: why kill her? Why not
simply steal the jewels? She would not prosecute.”

“Why not?”

“Because she is a woman, _mon ami_. She once loved this man. Therefore
she would suffer her loss in silence. And the Count, who is an
extremely good psychologist where women are concerned,—hence his
successes,—would know that perfectly well! On the other hand, if
Rupert Carrington killed her, why take the jewels, which would
incriminate him fatally?”

“As a blind.”

“Perhaps you are right, my friend. Ah, here is Japp! I recognize his
knock.”

The Inspector was beaming good-humoredly.

“Morning, Poirot. Only just got back. I’ve done some good work! And
you?”

“Me, I have arranged my ideas,” replied Poirot placidly.

Japp laughed heartily.

“Old chap’s getting on in years,” he observed beneath his breath to
me. “That wont do for us young folk,” he said aloud.

“_Quel dommage?_” Poirot inquired.

“Well, do you want to hear what I’ve done?”

“You permit me to make a guess? You have found the knife with which
the crime was committed by the side of the line between Weston and
Taunton, and you have interviewed the paper-boy who spoke to Mrs.
Carrington at Weston!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Japp’s jaw fell. “How on earth did you know? Don’t tell me it was
those almighty ‘little gray cells’ of yours!”

“I am glad you admit for once that they are _all mighty_! Tell me, did
she give the paper-boy a shilling for himself?”

“No, it was half a crown!” Japp recovered his temper and grinned.
“Pretty extravagant, these rich Americans!”

“And in consequence the boy did not forget her?”

“Not he. Half-crowns don’t come his way every day. She hailed him and
bought two magazines. One had a picture of a girl in blue on the
cover. ‘That’ll match me,’ she said. Oh! he remembered her perfectly.
Well, that was enough for me. By the doctor’s evidence, the crime
_must_ have been committed before Taunton. I guessed they’d throw the
knife away at once, and I walked down the line looking for it; and
sure enough, there it was. I made inquiries at Taunton about our man,
but of course it’s a big station, and it wasn’t likely they’d notice
him. He probably got back to London by a later train.”

Poirot nodded. “Very likely.”

“But I found another bit of news when I got back. They’re passing the
jewels, all right! That large emerald was pawned last night—by one of
the regular lot. Who do you think it was?”

“I don’t know—except that he was a short man.”

Japp stared. “Well, you’re right there. He’s short enough. It was Red
Narky.”

“Who on earth is Red Narky?” I asked.

“A particularly sharp jewel-thief, sir. And not one to stick at
murder. Usually works with a woman—Gracie Kidd; but she doesn’t seem
to be in it this time—unless she’s got off to Holland with the rest of
the swag.”

“You’ve arrested Narky?”

“Sure thing. But mind you, it’s the other man we want—the man who went
down with Mrs. Carrington in the train. He was the one who planned the
job, right enough. But Narky wont squeal on a pal.”

I noticed that Poirot’s eyes had become very green.

“I think,” he said gently, “that I can find Narky’s pal for you, all
right.”

“One of your little ideas, eh?” Japp eyed Poirot sharply. “Wonderful
how you manage to deliver the goods sometimes, at your age and all.
Devil’s own luck, of course.”

“Perhaps, perhaps,” murmured my friend. “Hastings, my hat. And the
brush. So! My galoshes if it still rains! We must not undo the good
work of that _tisano_. Au revoir, Japp!”

“Good luck to you, Poirot.”

Poirot hailed the first taxi we met, and directed the driver to Park
Lane.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When we drew up before Halliday’s house, he skipped out nimbly, paid
the driver and rang the bell. To the footman who opened the door he
made a request in a low voice, and we were immediately taken upstairs.
We went up to the top of the house, and were shown into a small neat
bedroom.

Poirot’s eyes roved round the room and fastened themselves on a small
black trunk. He knelt in front of it, scrutinized the labels on it,
and took a small twist of wire from his pocket.

“Ask Mr. Halliday if he will be so kind as to mount to me here,” he
said over his shoulder to the footman.

(It is suggested that the reader pause in his perusal of the story at
this point, make his own solution of the mystery—and then see how
close he comes to that of the author.—The Editors.)

The man departed, and Poirot gently coaxed the lock of the trunk with
a practiced hand. In a few minutes the lock gave, and he raised the
lid of the trunk. Swiftly he began rummaging among the clothes it
contained, flinging them out on the floor.

There was a heavy step on the stairs, and Halliday entered the room.

“What in hell are you doing here?” he demanded, staring.

“I was looking, monsieur, for _this_.” Poirot withdrew from the trunk
a coat and skirt of bright blue frieze, and a small toque of white fox
fur.

“What are you doing with my trunk?” I turned to see that the maid,
Jane Mason, had just entered the room.

“If you will just shut the door, Hastings. Thank you. Yes, and stand
with your back against it. Now, Mr. Halliday, let me introduce you to
Grace Kidd, otherwise Jane Mason, who will shortly rejoin her
accomplice, Red Narky, under the kind escort of Japp.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

“It was of the most simple.” Poirot waved a deprecating hand, then
helped himself to more caviare. It is not every day that one lunches
with a millionaire.

“It was the maid’s insistence on the clothes that her mistress was
wearing that first struck me. Why was she so anxious that our
attention should be directed to them? I reflected that we had only the
maid’s word for the mysterious man in the carriage at Bristol. As far
as the doctor’s evidence went, Mrs. Carrington might easily have been
murdered _before_ reaching Bristol. But if so, then the maid must be
an accomplice. And if she were an accomplice, she would not wish this
point to rest on her evidence alone. The clothes Mrs. Carrington was
wearing were of a striking nature. A maid usually has a good deal of
choice as to what her mistress shall wear. Now if, after Bristol,
anyone saw a lady in a bright blue coat and skirt, and a fur toque, he
will be quite ready to swear he has seen Mrs. Carrington.

“I began to reconstruct. The maid would provide herself with duplicate
clothes. She and her accomplice chloroform and stab Mrs. Carrington
between London and Bristol, probably taking advantage of a tunnel. Her
body is rolled under the seat; the maid takes her place. At Weston she
must make herself noticed. How? In all probability, a newspaper-boy
will be selected. She will insure his remembering her by giving him a
large tip. She also drew his attention to the color of her dress by a
remark about one of the magazines. After leaving Weston, she throws
the knife out of the window to mark the place where the crime
presumably occurred, and changes her clothes, or buttons a long
mackintosh over them. At Taunton she leaves the train and returns to
Bristol as soon as possible, where her accomplice has duly left the
luggage in the cloak-room. He hands over the ticket and himself
returns to London. She waits on the platform, carrying out her rôle,
goes to a hotel for the night and returns to town in the morning
exactly as she said.

“When Japp returned from his expedition, he confirmed all my
deductions. He also told me that a well-known crook was passing the
jewels. I knew that whoever it was would be the exact opposite of the
man Jane Mason described. When I heard that it was Red Narky, who
always worked with Gracie Kidd—well, I knew just where to find her.”

“And the Count?”

“The more I thought of it, the more I was convinced that he had
nothing to do with it. That gentleman is much too careful of his own
skin to risk murder. It would be out of keeping with his character.”

“Well, Monsieur Poirot,” said Halliday. “I owe you a big debt. And the
check I write after lunch wont go near to settling it.”

Poirot smiled modestly, and murmured to me: “The good Japp, he shall
get the official credit, all right, but though he has got his Gracie
Kidd, I think that I, as the Americans say, have got his goat!”


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the January 1924
issue of The Blue Book Magazine.]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLYMOUTH EXPRESS AFFAIR ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Secret Adversary
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Secret Adversary

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: January 1, 1998 [eBook #1155]
                Most recently updated: October 29, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Charles Keller and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET ADVERSARY ***

THE SECRET ADVERSARY

By Agatha Christie



                   TO ALL THOSE WHO LEAD
                   MONOTONOUS LIVES
                   IN THE HOPE THAT THEY MAY EXPERIENCE
                   AT SECOND HAND
                   THE DELIGHTS AND DANGERS OF
                   ADVENTURE



CONTENTS


PROLOGUE

CHAPTER I.   THE YOUNG ADVENTURERS, LTD.

CHAPTER II.   MR. WHITTINGTON’S OFFER

CHAPTER III.   A SET BACK

CHAPTER IV.   WHO IS JANE FINN?

CHAPTER V.   MR. JULIUS P. HERSHEIMMER

CHAPTER VI.   A PLAN OF CAMPAIGN

CHAPTER VII.   THE HOUSE IN SOHO

CHAPTER VIII.   THE ADVENTURES OF TOMMY

CHAPTER IX.   TUPPENCE ENTERS DOMESTIC SERVICE

CHAPTER X.   ENTER SIR JAMES PEEL EDGERTON

CHAPTER XI.   JULIUS TELLS A STORY

CHAPTER XII.   A FRIEND IN NEED

CHAPTER XIII.   THE VIGIL

CHAPTER XIV.   A CONSULTATION

CHAPTER XV.   TUPPENCE RECEIVES A PROPOSAL

CHAPTER XVI.   FURTHER ADVENTURES OF TOMMY

CHAPTER XVII.   ANNETTE

CHAPTER XVIII.   THE TELEGRAM

CHAPTER XIX.   JANE FINN

CHAPTER XX.   TOO LATE

CHAPTER XXI.   TOMMY MAKES A DISCOVERY

CHAPTER XXII.   IN DOWNING STREET

CHAPTER XXIII.   A RACE AGAINST TIME

CHAPTER XXIV.   JULIUS TAKES A HAND

CHAPTER XXV.   JANE’S STORY

CHAPTER XXVI.   MR. BROWN

CHAPTER XXVII.   A SUPPER PARTY AT THE _SAVOY_

CHAPTER XXVIII.     AND AFTER



PROLOGUE

IT was 2 p.m. on the afternoon of May 7, 1915. The _Lusitania_ had been
struck by two torpedoes in succession and was sinking rapidly, while
the boats were being launched with all possible speed. The women and
children were being lined up awaiting their turn. Some still clung
desperately to husbands and fathers; others clutched their children
closely to their breasts. One girl stood alone, slightly apart from
the rest. She was quite young, not more than eighteen. She did not seem
afraid, and her grave, steadfast eyes looked straight ahead.

“I beg your pardon.”

A man’s voice beside her made her start and turn. She had noticed the
speaker more than once amongst the first-class passengers. There had
been a hint of mystery about him which had appealed to her imagination.
He spoke to no one. If anyone spoke to him he was quick to rebuff the
overture. Also he had a nervous way of looking over his shoulder with a
swift, suspicious glance.

She noticed now that he was greatly agitated. There were beads of
perspiration on his brow. He was evidently in a state of overmastering
fear. And yet he did not strike her as the kind of man who would be
afraid to meet death!

“Yes?” Her grave eyes met his inquiringly.

He stood looking at her with a kind of desperate irresolution.

“It must be!” he muttered to himself. “Yes--it is the only way.” Then
aloud he said abruptly: “You are an American?”

“Yes.”

“A patriotic one?”

The girl flushed.

“I guess you’ve no right to ask such a thing! Of course I am!”

“Don’t be offended. You wouldn’t be if you knew how much there was at
stake. But I’ve got to trust some one--and it must be a woman.”

“Why?”

“Because of ‘women and children first.’” He looked round and lowered his
voice. “I’m carrying papers--vitally important papers. They may make all
the difference to the Allies in the war. You understand? These papers
have _got_ to be saved! They’ve more chance with you than with me. Will
you take them?”

The girl held out her hand.

“Wait--I must warn you. There may be a risk--if I’ve been followed. I
don’t think I have, but one never knows. If so, there will be danger.
Have you the nerve to go through with it?”

The girl smiled.

“I’ll go through with it all right. And I’m real proud to be chosen!
What am I to do with them afterwards?”

“Watch the newspapers! I’ll advertise in the personal column of the
_Times_, beginning ‘Shipmate.’ At the end of three days if there’s
nothing--well, you’ll know I’m down and out. Then take the packet to
the American Embassy, and deliver it into the Ambassador’s own hands. Is
that clear?”

“Quite clear.”

“Then be ready--I’m going to say good-bye.” He took her hand in his.
“Good-bye. Good luck to you,” he said in a louder tone.

Her hand closed on the oilskin packet that had lain in his palm.

The _Lusitania_ settled with a more decided list to starboard. In answer
to a quick command, the girl went forward to take her place in the boat.



CHAPTER I. THE YOUNG ADVENTURERS, LTD.

“TOMMY, old thing!”

“Tuppence, old bean!”

The two young people greeted each other affectionately, and momentarily
blocked the Dover Street Tube exit in doing so. The adjective “old”
 was misleading. Their united ages would certainly not have totalled
forty-five.

“Not seen you for simply centuries,” continued the young man. “Where are
you off to? Come and chew a bun with me. We’re getting a bit unpopular
here--blocking the gangway as it were. Let’s get out of it.”

The girl assenting, they started walking down Dover Street towards
Piccadilly.

“Now then,” said Tommy, “where shall we go?”

The very faint anxiety which underlay his tone did not escape the astute
ears of Miss Prudence Cowley, known to her intimate friends for some
mysterious reason as “Tuppence.” She pounced at once.

“Tommy, you’re stony!”

“Not a bit of it,” declared Tommy unconvincingly. “Rolling in cash.”

“You always were a shocking liar,” said Tuppence severely, “though you
did once persuade Sister Greenbank that the doctor had ordered you beer
as a tonic, but forgotten to write it on the chart. Do you remember?”

Tommy chuckled.

“I should think I did! Wasn’t the old cat in a rage when she found
out? Not that she was a bad sort really, old Mother Greenbank! Good old
hospital--demobbed like everything else, I suppose?”

Tuppence sighed.

“Yes. You too?”

Tommy nodded.

“Two months ago.”

“Gratuity?” hinted Tuppence.

“Spent.”

“Oh, Tommy!”

“No, old thing, not in riotous dissipation. No such luck! The cost of
living--ordinary plain, or garden living nowadays is, I assure you, if
you do not know----”

“My dear child,” interrupted Tuppence, “there is nothing I do _not_ know
about the cost of living. Here we are at Lyons’, and we will each of us
pay for our own. That’s it!” And Tuppence led the way upstairs.

The place was full, and they wandered about looking for a table,
catching odds and ends of conversation as they did so.

“And--do you know, she sat down and _cried_ when I told her she couldn’t
have the flat after all.” “It was simply a _bargain_, my dear! Just like
the one Mabel Lewis brought from Paris----”

“Funny scraps one does overhear,” murmured Tommy. “I passed two Johnnies
in the street to-day talking about some one called Jane Finn. Did you
ever hear such a name?”

But at that moment two elderly ladies rose and collected parcels, and
Tuppence deftly ensconced herself in one of the vacant seats.

Tommy ordered tea and buns. Tuppence ordered tea and buttered toast.

“And mind the tea comes in separate teapots,” she added severely.

Tommy sat down opposite her. His bared head revealed a shock
of exquisitely slicked-back red hair. His face was pleasantly
ugly--nondescript, yet unmistakably the face of a gentleman and a
sportsman. His brown suit was well cut, but perilously near the end of
its tether.

They were an essentially modern-looking couple as they sat there.
Tuppence had no claim to beauty, but there was character and charm in
the elfin lines of her little face, with its determined chin and large,
wide-apart grey eyes that looked mistily out from under straight, black
brows. She wore a small bright green toque over her black bobbed hair,
and her extremely short and rather shabby skirt revealed a pair of
uncommonly dainty ankles. Her appearance presented a valiant attempt at
smartness.

The tea came at last, and Tuppence, rousing herself from a fit of
meditation, poured it out.

“Now then,” said Tommy, taking a large bite of bun, “let’s get
up-to-date. Remember, I haven’t seen you since that time in hospital in
1916.”

“Very well.” Tuppence helped herself liberally to buttered toast.
“Abridged biography of Miss Prudence Cowley, fifth daughter of
Archdeacon Cowley of Little Missendell, Suffolk. Miss Cowley left the
delights (and drudgeries) of her home life early in the war and came up
to London, where she entered an officers’ hospital. First month: Washed
up six hundred and forty-eight plates every day. Second month: Promoted
to drying aforesaid plates. Third month: Promoted to peeling potatoes.
Fourth month: Promoted to cutting bread and butter. Fifth month:
Promoted one floor up to duties of wardmaid with mop and pail. Sixth
month: Promoted to waiting at table. Seventh month: Pleasing appearance
and nice manners so striking that am promoted to waiting on the Sisters!
Eighth month: Slight check in career. Sister Bond ate Sister Westhaven’s
egg! Grand row! Wardmaid clearly to blame! Inattention in such important
matters cannot be too highly censured. Mop and pail again! How are the
mighty fallen! Ninth month: Promoted to sweeping out wards, where I
found a friend of my childhood in Lieutenant Thomas Beresford (bow,
Tommy!), whom I had not seen for five long years. The meeting was
affecting! Tenth month: Reproved by matron for visiting the pictures in
company with one of the patients, namely: the aforementioned Lieutenant
Thomas Beresford. Eleventh and twelfth months: Parlourmaid duties
resumed with entire success. At the end of the year left hospital in a
blaze of glory. After that, the talented Miss Cowley drove successively
a trade delivery van, a motor-lorry and a general! The last was the
pleasantest. He was quite a young general!”

“What blighter was that?” inquired Tommy. “Perfectly sickening the way
those brass hats drove from the War Office to the _Savoy_, and from the
_Savoy_ to the War Office!”

“I’ve forgotten his name now,” confessed Tuppence. “To resume, that was
in a way the apex of my career. I next entered a Government office. We
had several very enjoyable tea parties. I had intended to become a
land girl, a postwoman, and a bus conductress by way of rounding off
my career--but the Armistice intervened! I clung to the office with the
true limpet touch for many long months, but, alas, I was combed out at
last. Since then I’ve been looking for a job. Now then--your turn.”

“There’s not so much promotion in mine,” said Tommy regretfully, “and a
great deal less variety. I went out to France again, as you know. Then
they sent me to Mesopotamia, and I got wounded for the second time,
and went into hospital out there. Then I got stuck in Egypt till the
Armistice happened, kicked my heels there some time longer, and, as I
told you, finally got demobbed. And, for ten long, weary months I’ve
been job hunting! There aren’t any jobs! And, if there were, they
wouldn’t give ‘em to me. What good am I? What do I know about business?
Nothing.”

Tuppence nodded gloomily.

“What about the colonies?” she suggested.

Tommy shook his head.

“I shouldn’t like the colonies--and I’m perfectly certain they wouldn’t
like me!”

“Rich relations?”

Again Tommy shook his head.

“Oh, Tommy, not even a great-aunt?”

“I’ve got an old uncle who’s more or less rolling, but he’s no good.”

“Why not?”

“Wanted to adopt me once. I refused.”

“I think I remember hearing about it,” said Tuppence slowly. “You
refused because of your mother----”

Tommy flushed.

“Yes, it would have been a bit rough on the mater. As you know, I was
all she had. Old boy hated her--wanted to get me away from her. Just a
bit of spite.”

“Your mother’s dead, isn’t she?” said Tuppence gently.

Tommy nodded.

Tuppence’s large grey eyes looked misty.

“You’re a good sort, Tommy. I always knew it.”

“Rot!” said Tommy hastily. “Well, that’s my position. I’m just about
desperate.”

“So am I! I’ve hung out as long as I could. I’ve touted round. I’ve
answered advertisements. I’ve tried every mortal blessed thing. I’ve
screwed and saved and pinched! But it’s no good. I shall have to go
home!”

“Don’t you want to?”

“Of course I don’t want to! What’s the good of being sentimental?
Father’s a dear--I’m awfully fond of him--but you’ve no idea how I worry
him! He has that delightful early Victorian view that short skirts and
smoking are immoral. You can imagine what a thorn in the flesh I am to
him! He just heaved a sigh of relief when the war took me off. You see,
there are seven of us at home. It’s awful! All housework and mothers’
meetings! I have always been the changeling. I don’t want to go back,
but--oh, Tommy, what else is there to do?”

Tommy shook his head sadly. There was a silence, and then Tuppence burst
out:

“Money, money, money! I think about money morning, noon and night! I
dare say it’s mercenary of me, but there it is!”

“Same here,” agreed Tommy with feeling.

“I’ve thought over every imaginable way of getting it too,” continued
Tuppence. “There are only three! To be left it, to marry it, or to make
it. First is ruled out. I haven’t got any rich elderly relatives. Any
relatives I have are in homes for decayed gentlewomen! I always help old
ladies over crossings, and pick up parcels for old gentlemen, in case
they should turn out to be eccentric millionaires. But not one of them
has ever asked me my name--and quite a lot never said ‘Thank you.’”

There was a pause.

“Of course,” resumed Tuppence, “marriage is my best chance. I made up my
mind to marry money when I was quite young. Any thinking girl would!
I’m not sentimental, you know.” She paused. “Come now, you can’t say I’m
sentimental,” she added sharply.

“Certainly not,” agreed Tommy hastily. “No one would ever think of
sentiment in connection with you.”

“That’s not very polite,” replied Tuppence. “But I dare say you mean it
all right. Well, there it is! I’m ready and willing--but I never meet
any rich men! All the boys I know are about as hard up as I am.”

“What about the general?” inquired Tommy.

“I fancy he keeps a bicycle shop in time of peace,” explained Tuppence.
“No, there it is! Now _you_ could marry a rich girl.”

“I’m like you. I don’t know any.”

“That doesn’t matter. You can always get to know one. Now, if I see a
man in a fur coat come out of the _Ritz_ I can’t rush up to him and say:
‘Look here, you’re rich. I’d like to know you.’”

“Do you suggest that I should do that to a similarly garbed female?”

“Don’t be silly. You tread on her foot, or pick up her handkerchief, or
something like that. If she thinks you want to know her she’s flattered,
and will manage it for you somehow.”

“You overrate my manly charms,” murmured Tommy.

“On the other hand,” proceeded Tuppence, “my millionaire would probably
run for his life! No--marriage is fraught with difficulties. Remains--to
_make_ money!”

“We’ve tried that, and failed,” Tommy reminded her.

“We’ve tried all the orthodox ways, yes. But suppose we try the
unorthodox. Tommy, let’s be adventurers!”

“Certainly,” replied Tommy cheerfully. “How do we begin?”

“That’s the difficulty. If we could make ourselves known, people might
hire us to commit crimes for them.”

“Delightful,” commented Tommy. “Especially coming from a clergyman’s
daughter!”

“The moral guilt,” Tuppence pointed out, “would be theirs--not mine. You
must admit that there’s a difference between stealing a diamond necklace
for yourself and being hired to steal it.”

“There wouldn’t be the least difference if you were caught!”

“Perhaps not. But I shouldn’t be caught. I’m so clever.”

“Modesty always was your besetting sin,” remarked Tommy.

“Don’t rag. Look here, Tommy, shall we really? Shall we form a business
partnership?”

“Form a company for the stealing of diamond necklaces?”

“That was only an illustration. Let’s have a--what do you call it in
book-keeping?”

“Don’t know. Never did any.”

“I have--but I always got mixed up, and used to put credit entries on
the debit side, and vice versa--so they fired me out. Oh, I know--a
joint venture! It struck me as such a romantic phrase to come across in
the middle of musty old figures. It’s got an Elizabethan flavour about
it--makes one think of galleons and doubloons. A joint venture!”

“Trading under the name of the Young Adventurers, Ltd.? Is that your
idea, Tuppence?”

“It’s all very well to laugh, but I feel there might be something in
it.”

“How do you propose to get in touch with your would-be employers?”

“Advertisement,” replied Tuppence promptly. “Have you got a bit of paper
and a pencil? Men usually seem to have. Just like we have hairpins and
powder-puffs.”

Tommy handed over a rather shabby green notebook, and Tuppence began
writing busily.

“Shall we begin: ‘Young officer, twice wounded in the war----’”

“Certainly not.”

“Oh, very well, my dear boy. But I can assure you that that sort of
thing might touch the heart of an elderly spinster, and she might adopt
you, and then there would be no need for you to be a young adventurer at
all.”

“I don’t want to be adopted.”

“I forgot you had a prejudice against it. I was only ragging you!
The papers are full up to the brim with that type of thing. Now
listen--how’s this? ‘Two young adventurers for hire. Willing to do
anything, go anywhere. Pay must be good.’ (We might as well make
that clear from the start.) Then we might add: ‘No reasonable offer
refused’--like flats and furniture.”

“I should think any offer we get in answer to that would be a pretty
_un_reasonable one!”

“Tommy! You’re a genius! That’s ever so much more chic. ‘No unreasonable
offer refused--if pay is good.’ How’s that?”

“I shouldn’t mention pay again. It looks rather eager.”

“It couldn’t look as eager as I feel! But perhaps you are right. Now
I’ll read it straight through. ‘Two young adventurers for hire. Willing
to do anything, go anywhere. Pay must be good. No unreasonable offer
refused.’ How would that strike you if you read it?”

“It would strike me as either being a hoax, or else written by a
lunatic.”

“It’s not half so insane as a thing I read this morning beginning
‘Petunia’ and signed ‘Best Boy.’” She tore out the leaf and handed it
to Tommy. “There you are. _Times_, I think. Reply to Box so-and-so.
I expect it will be about five shillings. Here’s half a crown for my
share.”

Tommy was holding the paper thoughtfully. His faced burned a deeper red.

“Shall we really try it?” he said at last. “Shall we, Tuppence? Just for
the fun of the thing?”

“Tommy, you’re a sport! I knew you would be! Let’s drink to success.”
 She poured some cold dregs of tea into the two cups.

“Here’s to our joint venture, and may it prosper!”

“The Young Adventurers, Ltd.!” responded Tommy.

They put down the cups and laughed rather uncertainly. Tuppence rose.

“I must return to my palatial suite at the hostel.”

“Perhaps it is time I strolled round to the _Ritz_,” agreed Tommy with a
grin. “Where shall we meet? And when?”

“Twelve o’clock to-morrow. Piccadilly Tube station. Will that suit you?”

“My time is my own,” replied Mr. Beresford magnificently.

“So long, then.”

“Good-bye, old thing.”

The two young people went off in opposite directions. Tuppence’s hostel
was situated in what was charitably called Southern Belgravia. For
reasons of economy she did not take a bus.

She was half-way across St. James’s Park, when a man’s voice behind her
made her start.

“Excuse me,” it said. “But may I speak to you for a moment?”



CHAPTER II. MR. WHITTINGTON’S OFFER

TUPPENCE turned sharply, but the words hovering on the tip of her tongue
remained unspoken, for the man’s appearance and manner did not bear out
her first and most natural assumption. She hesitated. As if he read her
thoughts, the man said quickly:

“I can assure you I mean no disrespect.”

Tuppence believed him. Although she disliked and distrusted him
instinctively, she was inclined to acquit him of the particular motive
which she had at first attributed to him. She looked him up and down. He
was a big man, clean shaven, with a heavy jowl. His eyes were small and
cunning, and shifted their glance under her direct gaze.

“Well, what is it?” she asked.

The man smiled.

“I happened to overhear part of your conversation with the young
gentleman in Lyons’.”

“Well--what of it?”

“Nothing--except that I think I may be of some use to you.”

Another inference forced itself into Tuppence’s mind:

“You followed me here?”

“I took that liberty.”

“And in what way do you think you could be of use to me?”

The man took a card from his pocket and handed it to her with a bow.

Tuppence took it and scrutinized it carefully. It bore the inscription,
“Mr. Edward Whittington.” Below the name were the words “Esthonia
Glassware Co.,” and the address of a city office. Mr. Whittington spoke
again:

“If you will call upon me to-morrow morning at eleven o’clock, I will
lay the details of my proposition before you.”

“At eleven o’clock?” said Tuppence doubtfully.

“At eleven o’clock.”

Tuppence made up her mind.

“Very well. I’ll be there.”

“Thank you. Good evening.”

He raised his hat with a flourish, and walked away. Tuppence remained
for some minutes gazing after him. Then she gave a curious movement of
her shoulders, rather as a terrier shakes himself.

“The adventures have begun,” she murmured to herself. “What does he want
me to do, I wonder? There’s something about you, Mr. Whittington, that I
don’t like at all. But, on the other hand, I’m not the least bit afraid
of you. And as I’ve said before, and shall doubtless say again, little
Tuppence can look after herself, thank you!”

And with a short, sharp nod of her head she walked briskly onward. As a
result of further meditations, however, she turned aside from the direct
route and entered a post office. There she pondered for some moments,
a telegraph form in her hand. The thought of a possible five shillings
spent unnecessarily spurred her to action, and she decided to risk the
waste of ninepence.

Disdaining the spiky pen and thick, black treacle which a beneficent
Government had provided, Tuppence drew out Tommy’s pencil which she had
retained and wrote rapidly: “Don’t put in advertisement. Will explain
to-morrow.” She addressed it to Tommy at his club, from which in one
short month he would have to resign, unless a kindly fortune permitted
him to renew his subscription.

“It may catch him,” she murmured. “Anyway, it’s worth trying.”

After handing it over the counter she set out briskly for home, stopping
at a baker’s to buy three penny-worth of new buns.

Later, in her tiny cubicle at the top of the house she munched buns and
reflected on the future. What was the Esthonia Glassware Co., and what
earthly need could it have for her services? A pleasurable thrill of
excitement made Tuppence tingle. At any rate, the country vicarage had
retreated into the background again. The morrow held possibilities.

It was a long time before Tuppence went to sleep that night, and, when
at length she did, she dreamed that Mr. Whittington had set her to
washing up a pile of Esthonia Glassware, which bore an unaccountable
resemblance to hospital plates!

It wanted some five minutes to eleven when Tuppence reached the block
of buildings in which the offices of the Esthonia Glassware Co. were
situated. To arrive before the time would look over-eager. So Tuppence
decided to walk to the end of the street and back again. She did so. On
the stroke of eleven she plunged into the recesses of the building.
The Esthonia Glassware Co. was on the top floor. There was a lift, but
Tuppence chose to walk up.

Slightly out of breath, she came to a halt outside the ground glass door
with the legend painted across it “Esthonia Glassware Co.”

Tuppence knocked. In response to a voice from within, she turned the
handle and walked into a small rather dirty outer office.

A middle-aged clerk got down from a high stool at a desk near the window
and came towards her inquiringly.

“I have an appointment with Mr. Whittington,” said Tuppence.

“Will you come this way, please.” He crossed to a partition door with
“Private” on it, knocked, then opened the door and stood aside to let
her pass in.

Mr. Whittington was seated behind a large desk covered with papers.
Tuppence felt her previous judgment confirmed. There was something wrong
about Mr. Whittington. The combination of his sleek prosperity and his
shifty eye was not attractive.

He looked up and nodded.

“So you’ve turned up all right? That’s good. Sit down, will you?”

Tuppence sat down on the chair facing him. She looked particularly small
and demure this morning. She sat there meekly with downcast eyes whilst
Mr. Whittington sorted and rustled amongst his papers. Finally he pushed
them away, and leaned over the desk.

“Now, my dear young lady, let us come to business.” His large face
broadened into a smile. “You want work? Well, I have work to offer
you. What should you say now to £100 down, and all expenses paid?” Mr.
Whittington leaned back in his chair, and thrust his thumbs into the
arm-holes of his waistcoat.

Tuppence eyed him warily.

“And the nature of the work?” she demanded.

“Nominal--purely nominal. A pleasant trip, that is all.”

“Where to?”

Mr. Whittington smiled again.

“Paris.”

“Oh!” said Tuppence thoughtfully. To herself she said: “Of course,
if father heard that he would have a fit! But somehow I don’t see Mr.
Whittington in the role of the gay deceiver.”

“Yes,” continued Whittington. “What could be more delightful? To put the
clock back a few years--a very few, I am sure--and re-enter one of those
charming _pensionnats de jeunes filles_ with which Paris abounds----”

Tuppence interrupted him.

“A _pensionnat?_”

“Exactly. Madame Colombier’s in the Avenue de Neuilly.”

Tuppence knew the name well. Nothing could have been more select. She
had had several American friends there. She was more than ever puzzled.

“You want me to go to Madame Colombier’s? For how long?”

“That depends. Possibly three months.”

“And that is all? There are no other conditions?”

“None whatever. You would, of course, go in the character of my ward,
and you would hold no communication with your friends. I should have
to request absolute secrecy for the time being. By the way, you are
English, are you not?”

“Yes.”

“Yet you speak with a slight American accent?”

“My great pal in hospital was a little American girl. I dare say I
picked it up from her. I can soon get out of it again.”

“On the contrary, it might be simpler for you to pass as an American.
Details about your past life in England might be more difficult to
sustain. Yes, I think that would be decidedly better. Then----”

“One moment, Mr. Whittington! You seem to be taking my consent for
granted.”

Whittington looked surprised.

“Surely you are not thinking of refusing? I can assure you that Madame
Colombier’s is a most high-class and orthodox establishment. And the
terms are most liberal.”

“Exactly,” said Tuppence. “That’s just it. The terms are almost too
liberal, Mr. Whittington. I cannot see any way in which I can be worth
that amount of money to you.”

“No?” said Whittington softly. “Well, I will tell you. I could doubtless
obtain some one else for very much less. What I am willing to pay for
is a young lady with sufficient intelligence and presence of mind to
sustain her part well, and also one who will have sufficient discretion
not to ask too many questions.”

Tuppence smiled a little. She felt that Whittington had scored.

“There’s another thing. So far there has been no mention of Mr.
Beresford. Where does he come in?”

“Mr. Beresford?”

“My partner,” said Tuppence with dignity. “You saw us together
yesterday.”

“Ah, yes. But I’m afraid we shan’t require his services.”

“Then it’s off!” Tuppence rose. “It’s both or neither. Sorry--but that’s
how it is. Good morning, Mr. Whittington.”

“Wait a minute. Let us see if something can’t be managed. Sit down
again, Miss----” He paused interrogatively.

Tuppence’s conscience gave her a passing twinge as she remembered the
archdeacon. She seized hurriedly on the first name that came into her
head.

“Jane Finn,” she said hastily; and then paused open-mouthed at the
effect of those two simple words.

All the geniality had faded out of Whittington’s face. It was purple
with rage, and the veins stood out on the forehead. And behind it all
there lurked a sort of incredulous dismay. He leaned forward and hissed
savagely:

“So that’s your little game, is it?”

Tuppence, though utterly taken aback, nevertheless kept her head. She
had not the faintest comprehension of his meaning, but she was naturally
quick-witted, and felt it imperative to “keep her end up” as she phrased
it.

Whittington went on:

“Been playing with me, have you, all the time, like a cat and mouse?
Knew all the time what I wanted you for, but kept up the comedy. Is that
it, eh?” He was cooling down. The red colour was ebbing out of his face.
He eyed her keenly. “Who’s been blabbing? Rita?”

Tuppence shook her head. She was doubtful as to how long she could
sustain this illusion, but she realized the importance of not dragging
an unknown Rita into it.

“No,” she replied with perfect truth. “Rita knows nothing about me.”

His eyes still bored into her like gimlets.

“How much do you know?” he shot out.

“Very little indeed,” answered Tuppence, and was pleased to note that
Whittington’s uneasiness was augmented instead of allayed. To have
boasted that she knew a lot might have raised doubts in his mind.

“Anyway,” snarled Whittington, “you knew enough to come in here and
plump out that name.”

“It might be my own name,” Tuppence pointed out.

“It’s likely, isn’t it, then there would be two girls with a name like
that?”

“Or I might just have hit upon it by chance,” continued Tuppence,
intoxicated with the success of truthfulness.

Mr. Whittington brought his fist down upon the desk with a bang.

“Quit fooling! How much do you know? And how much do you want?”

The last five words took Tuppence’s fancy mightily, especially after a
meagre breakfast and a supper of buns the night before. Her present part
was of the adventuress rather than the adventurous order, but she did
not deny its possibilities. She sat up and smiled with the air of one
who has the situation thoroughly well in hand.

“My dear Mr. Whittington,” she said, “let us by all means lay our cards
upon the table. And pray do not be so angry. You heard me say yesterday
that I proposed to live by my wits. It seems to me that I have now
proved I have some wits to live by! I admit I have knowledge of a
certain name, but perhaps my knowledge ends there.”

“Yes--and perhaps it doesn’t,” snarled Whittington.

“You insist on misjudging me,” said Tuppence, and sighed gently.

“As I said once before,” said Whittington angrily, “quit fooling, and
come to the point. You can’t play the innocent with me. You know a great
deal more than you’re willing to admit.”

Tuppence paused a moment to admire her own ingenuity, and then said
softly:

“I shouldn’t like to contradict you, Mr. Whittington.”

“So we come to the usual question--how much?”

Tuppence was in a dilemma. So far she had fooled Whittington with
complete success, but to mention a palpably impossible sum might awaken
his suspicions. An idea flashed across her brain.

“Suppose we say a little something down, and a fuller discussion of the
matter later?”

Whittington gave her an ugly glance.

“Blackmail, eh?”

Tuppence smiled sweetly.

“Oh no! Shall we say payment of services in advance?”

Whittington grunted.

“You see,” explained Tuppence still sweetly, “I’m so very fond of
money!”

“You’re about the limit, that’s what you are,” growled Whittington, with
a sort of unwilling admiration. “You took me in all right. Thought you
were quite a meek little kid with just enough brains for my purpose.”

“Life,” moralized Tuppence, “is full of surprises.”

“All the same,” continued Whittington, “some one’s been talking. You say
it isn’t Rita. Was it----? Oh, come in.”

The clerk followed his discreet knock into the room, and laid a paper at
his master’s elbow.

“Telephone message just come for you, sir.”

Whittington snatched it up and read it. A frown gathered on his brow.

“That’ll do, Brown. You can go.”

The clerk withdrew, closing the door behind him. Whittington turned to
Tuppence.

“Come to-morrow at the same time. I’m busy now. Here’s fifty to go on
with.”

He rapidly sorted out some notes, and pushed them across the table to
Tuppence, then stood up, obviously impatient for her to go.

The girl counted the notes in a businesslike manner, secured them in her
handbag, and rose.

“Good morning, Mr. Whittington,” she said politely. “At least, au
revoir, I should say.”

“Exactly. Au revoir!” Whittington looked almost genial again, a
reversion that aroused in Tuppence a faint misgiving. “Au revoir, my
clever and charming young lady.”

Tuppence sped lightly down the stairs. A wild elation possessed her. A
neighbouring clock showed the time to be five minutes to twelve.

“Let’s give Tommy a surprise!” murmured Tuppence, and hailed a taxi.

The cab drew up outside the tube station. Tommy was just within the
entrance. His eyes opened to their fullest extent as he hurried forward
to assist Tuppence to alight. She smiled at him affectionately, and
remarked in a slightly affected voice:

“Pay the thing, will you, old bean? I’ve got nothing smaller than a
five-pound note!”



CHAPTER III. A SET BACK

THE moment was not quite so triumphant as it ought to have been. To
begin with, the resources of Tommy’s pockets were somewhat limited. In
the end the fare was managed, the lady recollecting a plebeian twopence,
and the driver, still holding the varied assortment of coins in his
hand, was prevailed upon to move on, which he did after one last hoarse
demand as to what the gentleman thought he was giving him?

“I think you’ve given him too much, Tommy,” said Tuppence innocently. “I
fancy he wants to give some of it back.”

It was possibly this remark which induced the driver to move away.

“Well,” said Mr. Beresford, at length able to relieve his feelings,
“what the--dickens, did you want to take a taxi for?”

“I was afraid I might be late and keep you waiting,” said Tuppence
gently.

“Afraid--you--might--be--late! Oh, Lord, I give it up!” said Mr.
Beresford.

“And really and truly,” continued Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide,
“I haven’t got anything smaller than a five-pound note.”

“You did that part of it very well, old bean, but all the same the
fellow wasn’t taken in--not for a moment!”

“No,” said Tuppence thoughtfully, “he didn’t believe it. That’s the
curious part about speaking the truth. No one does believe it. I found
that out this morning. Now let’s go to lunch. How about the _Savoy?_”

Tommy grinned.

“How about the _Ritz?_”

“On second thoughts, I prefer the _Piccadilly_. It’s nearer. We shan’t
have to take another taxi. Come along.”

“Is this a new brand of humour? Or is your brain really unhinged?”
 inquired Tommy.

“Your last supposition is the correct one. I have come into money, and
the shock has been too much for me! For that particular form of mental
trouble an eminent physician recommends unlimited _Hors d’œuvre_,
Lobster _à l’américane_, Chicken Newberg, and Pêche Melba! Let’s go
and get them!”

“Tuppence, old girl, what has really come over you?”

“Oh, unbelieving one!” Tuppence wrenched open her bag. “Look here, and
here, and here!”

“Great Jehosaphat! My dear girl, don’t wave Fishers aloft like that!”

“They’re not Fishers. They’re five times better than Fishers, and this
one’s ten times better!”

Tommy groaned.

“I must have been drinking unawares! Am I dreaming, Tuppence, or do I
really behold a large quantity of five-pound notes being waved about in
a dangerous fashion?”

“Even so, O King! _Now_, will you come and have lunch?”

“I’ll come anywhere. But what have you been doing? Holding up a bank?”

“All in good time. What an awful place Piccadilly Circus is. There’s a
huge bus bearing down on us. It would be too terrible if they killed the
five-pound notes!”

“Grill room?” inquired Tommy, as they reached the opposite pavement in
safety.

“The other’s more expensive,” demurred Tuppence.

“That’s mere wicked wanton extravagance. Come on below.”

“Are you sure I can get all the things I want there?”

“That extremely unwholesome menu you were outlining just now? Of course
you can--or as much as is good for you, anyway.”

“And now tell me,” said Tommy, unable to restrain his pent-up curiosity
any longer, as they sat in state surrounded by the many _hors d’œuvre_
of Tuppence’s dreams.

Miss Cowley told him.

“And the curious part of it is,” she ended, “that I really did invent
the name of Jane Finn! I didn’t want to give my own because of poor
father--in case I should get mixed up in anything shady.”

“Perhaps that’s so,” said Tommy slowly. “But you didn’t invent it.”

“What?”

“No. _I_ told it to you. Don’t you remember, I said yesterday I’d
overheard two people talking about a female called Jane Finn? That’s
what brought the name into your mind so pat.”

“So you did. I remember now. How extraordinary----” Tuppence tailed off
into silence. Suddenly she aroused herself. “Tommy!”

“Yes?”

“What were they like, the two men you passed?”

Tommy frowned in an effort at remembrance.

“One was a big fat sort of chap. Clean shaven, I think--and dark.”

“That’s him,” cried Tuppence, in an ungrammatical squeal. “That’s
Whittington! What was the other man like?”

“I can’t remember. I didn’t notice him particularly. It was really the
outlandish name that caught my attention.”

“And people say that coincidences don’t happen!” Tuppence tackled her
Pêche Melba happily.

But Tommy had become serious.

“Look here, Tuppence, old girl, what is this going to lead to?”

“More money,” replied his companion.

“I know that. You’ve only got one idea in your head. What I mean is,
what about the next step? How are you going to keep the game up?”

“Oh!” Tuppence laid down her spoon. “You’re right, Tommy, it is a bit of
a poser.”

“After all, you know, you can’t bluff him forever. You’re sure to slip
up sooner or later. And, anyway, I’m not at all sure that it isn’t
actionable--blackmail, you know.”

“Nonsense. Blackmail is saying you’ll tell unless you are given
money. Now, there’s nothing I could tell, because I don’t really know
anything.”

“Hm,” said Tommy doubtfully. “Well, anyway, what _are_ we going to do?
Whittington was in a hurry to get rid of you this morning, but next time
he’ll want to know something more before he parts with his money. He’ll
want to know how much _you_ know, and where you got your information
from, and a lot of other things that you can’t cope with. What are you
going to do about it?”

Tuppence frowned severely.

“We must think. Order some Turkish coffee, Tommy. Stimulating to the
brain. Oh, dear, what a lot I have eaten!”

“You have made rather a hog of yourself! So have I for that matter, but
I flatter myself that my choice of dishes was more judicious than yours.
Two coffees.” (This was to the waiter.) “One Turkish, one French.”

Tuppence sipped her coffee with a deeply reflective air, and snubbed
Tommy when he spoke to her.

“Be quiet. I’m thinking.”

“Shades of Pelmanism!” said Tommy, and relapsed into silence.

“There!” said Tuppence at last. “I’ve got a plan. Obviously what we’ve
got to do is to find out more about it all.”

Tommy applauded.

“Don’t jeer. We can only find out through Whittington. We must discover
where he lives, what he does--sleuth him, in fact! Now I can’t do it,
because he knows me, but he only saw you for a minute or two in Lyons’.
He’s not likely to recognize you. After all, one young man is much like
another.”

“I repudiate that remark utterly. I’m sure my pleasing features and
distinguished appearance would single me out from any crowd.”

“My plan is this,” Tuppence went on calmly, “I’ll go alone to-morrow.
I’ll put him off again like I did to-day. It doesn’t matter if I don’t
get any more money at once. Fifty pounds ought to last us a few days.”

“Or even longer!”

“You’ll hang about outside. When I come out I shan’t speak to you in
case he’s watching. But I’ll take up my stand somewhere near, and when
he comes out of the building I’ll drop a handkerchief or something, and
off you go!”

“Off I go where?”

“Follow him, of course, silly! What do you think of the idea?”

“Sort of thing one reads about in books. I somehow feel that in real
life one will feel a bit of an ass standing in the street for hours with
nothing to do. People will wonder what I’m up to.”

“Not in the city. Every one’s in such a hurry. Probably no one will even
notice you at all.”

“That’s the second time you’ve made that sort of remark. Never mind, I
forgive you. Anyway, it will be rather a lark. What are you doing this
afternoon?”

“Well,” said Tuppence meditatively. “I _had_ thought of hats! Or perhaps
silk stockings! Or perhaps----”

“Hold hard,” admonished Tommy. “There’s a limit to fifty pounds! But
let’s do dinner and a show to-night at all events.”

“Rather.”

The day passed pleasantly. The evening even more so. Two of the
five-pound notes were now irretrievably dead.

They met by arrangement the following morning and proceeded citywards.
Tommy remained on the opposite side of the road while Tuppence plunged
into the building.

Tommy strolled slowly down to the end of the street, then back again.
Just as he came abreast of the building, Tuppence darted across the
road.

“Tommy!”

“Yes. What’s up?”

“The place is shut. I can’t make anyone hear.”

“That’s odd.”

“Isn’t it? Come up with me, and let’s try again.”

Tommy followed her. As they passed the third floor landing a young clerk
came out of an office. He hesitated a moment, then addressed himself to
Tuppence.

“Were you wanting the Esthonia Glassware?”

“Yes, please.”

“It’s closed down. Since yesterday afternoon. Company being wound up,
they say. Not that I’ve ever heard of it myself. But anyway the office
is to let.”

“Th--thank you,” faltered Tuppence. “I suppose you don’t know Mr.
Whittington’s address?”

“Afraid I don’t. They left rather suddenly.”

“Thank you very much,” said Tommy. “Come on, Tuppence.”

They descended to the street again where they gazed at one another
blankly.

“That’s torn it,” said Tommy at length.

“And I never suspected it,” wailed Tuppence.

“Cheer up, old thing, it can’t be helped.”

“Can’t it, though!” Tuppence’s little chin shot out defiantly. “Do you
think this is the end? If so, you’re wrong. It’s just the beginning!”

“The beginning of what?”

“Of our adventure! Tommy, don’t you see, if they are scared enough to
run away like this, it shows that there must be a lot in this Jane Finn
business! Well, we’ll get to the bottom of it. We’ll run them down!
We’ll be sleuths in earnest!”

“Yes, but there’s no one left to sleuth.”

“No, that’s why we’ll have to start all over again. Lend me that bit of
pencil. Thanks. Wait a minute--don’t interrupt. There!” Tuppence handed
back the pencil, and surveyed the piece of paper on which she had
written with a satisfied eye:

“What’s that?”

“Advertisement.”

“You’re not going to put that thing in after all?”

“No, it’s a different one.” She handed him the slip of paper.

Tommy read the words on it aloud:

“WANTED, any information respecting Jane Finn. Apply Y. A.”



CHAPTER IV. WHO IS JANE FINN?

THE next day passed slowly. It was necessary to curtail expenditure.
Carefully husbanded, forty pounds will last a long time. Luckily the
weather was fine, and “walking is cheap,” dictated Tuppence. An outlying
picture house provided them with recreation for the evening.

The day of disillusionment had been a Wednesday. On Thursday the
advertisement had duly appeared. On Friday letters might be expected to
arrive at Tommy’s rooms.

He had been bound by an honourable promise not to open any such letters
if they did arrive, but to repair to the National Gallery, where his
colleague would meet him at ten o’clock.

Tuppence was first at the rendezvous. She ensconced herself on a red
velvet seat, and gazed at the Turners with unseeing eyes until she saw
the familiar figure enter the room.

“Well?”

“Well,” returned Mr. Beresford provokingly. “Which is your favourite
picture?”

“Don’t be a wretch. Aren’t there _any_ answers?”

Tommy shook his head with a deep and somewhat overacted melancholy.

“I didn’t want to disappoint you, old thing, by telling you right off.
It’s too bad. Good money wasted.” He sighed. “Still, there it is. The
advertisement has appeared, and--there are only two answers!”

“Tommy, you devil!” almost screamed Tuppence. “Give them to me. How
could you be so mean!”

“Your language, Tuppence, your language! They’re very particular at the
National Gallery. Government show, you know. And do remember, as I have
pointed out to you before, that as a clergyman’s daughter----”

“I ought to be on the stage!” finished Tuppence with a snap.

“That is not what I intended to say. But if you are sure that you have
enjoyed to the full the reaction of joy after despair with which I have
kindly provided you free of charge, let us get down to our mail, as the
saying goes.”

Tuppence snatched the two precious envelopes from him unceremoniously,
and scrutinized them carefully.

“Thick paper, this one. It looks rich. We’ll keep it to the last and
open the other first.”

“Right you are. One, two, three, go!”

Tuppence’s little thumb ripped open the envelope, and she extracted the
contents.

“DEAR SIR,

“Referring to your advertisement in this morning’s paper, I may be able
to be of some use to you. Perhaps you could call and see me at the above
address at eleven o’clock to-morrow morning.

“Yours truly,

“A. CARTER.”

“27 Carshalton Gardens,” said Tuppence, referring to the address.
“That’s Gloucester Road way. Plenty of time to get there if we tube.”

“The following,” said Tommy, “is the plan of campaign. It is my turn to
assume the offensive. Ushered into the presence of Mr. Carter, he and I
wish each other good morning as is customary. He then says: ‘Please take
a seat, Mr.--er?’ To which I reply promptly and significantly: ‘Edward
Whittington!’ whereupon Mr. Carter turns purple in the face and gasps
out: ‘How much?’ Pocketing the usual fee of fifty pounds, I rejoin you
in the road outside, and we proceed to the next address and repeat the
performance.”

“Don’t be absurd, Tommy. Now for the other letter. Oh, this is from the
_Ritz!_”

“A hundred pounds instead of fifty!”

“I’ll read it:

“DEAR SIR,

“Re your advertisement, I should be glad if you would call round
somewhere about lunch-time.

“Yours truly,

“JULIUS P. HERSHEIMMER.”

“Ha!” said Tommy. “Do I smell a Boche? Or only an American millionaire
of unfortunate ancestry? At all events we’ll call at lunch-time. It’s a
good time--frequently leads to free food for two.”

Tuppence nodded assent.

“Now for Carter. We’ll have to hurry.”

Carshalton Terrace proved to be an unimpeachable row of what Tuppence
called “ladylike looking houses.” They rang the bell at No. 27, and a
neat maid answered the door. She looked so respectable that Tuppence’s
heart sank. Upon Tommy’s request for Mr. Carter, she showed them into
a small study on the ground floor where she left them. Hardly a minute
elapsed, however, before the door opened, and a tall man with a lean
hawklike face and a tired manner entered the room.

“Mr. Y. A.?” he said, and smiled. His smile was distinctly attractive.
“Do sit down, both of you.”

They obeyed. He himself took a chair opposite to Tuppence and smiled at
her encouragingly. There was something in the quality of his smile that
made the girl’s usual readiness desert her.

As he did not seem inclined to open the conversation, Tuppence was
forced to begin.

“We wanted to know--that is, would you be so kind as to tell us anything
you know about Jane Finn?”

“Jane Finn? Ah!” Mr. Carter appeared to reflect. “Well, the question is,
what do _you_ know about her?”

Tuppence drew herself up.

“I don’t see that that’s got anything to do with it.”

“No? But it has, you know, really it has.” He smiled again in his tired
way, and continued reflectively. “So that brings us down to it again.
What do _you_ know about Jane Finn?

“Come now,” he continued, as Tuppence remained silent. “You must know
_something_ to have advertised as you did?” He leaned forward a little,
his weary voice held a hint of persuasiveness. “Suppose you tell me....”

There was something very magnetic about Mr. Carter’s personality.
Tuppence seemed to shake herself free of it with an effort, as she said:

“We couldn’t do that, could we, Tommy?”

But to her surprise, her companion did not back her up. His eyes were
fixed on Mr. Carter, and his tone when he spoke held an unusual note of
deference.

“I dare say the little we know won’t be any good to you, sir. But such
as it is, you’re welcome to it.”

“Tommy!” cried out Tuppence in surprise.

Mr. Carter slewed round in his chair. His eyes asked a question.

Tommy nodded.

“Yes, sir, I recognized you at once. Saw you in France when I was with
the Intelligence. As soon as you came into the room, I knew----”

Mr. Carter held up his hand.

“No names, please. I’m known as Mr. Carter here. It’s my cousin’s house,
by the way. She’s willing to lend it to me sometimes when it’s a case of
working on strictly unofficial lines. Well, now”--he looked from one to
the other--“who’s going to tell me the story?”

“Fire ahead, Tuppence,” directed Tommy. “It’s your yarn.”

“Yes, little lady, out with it.”

And obediently Tuppence did out with it, telling the whole story from
the forming of the Young Adventurers, Ltd., downwards.

Mr. Carter listened in silence with a resumption of his tired manner.
Now and then he passed his hand across his lips as though to hide a
smile. When she had finished he nodded gravely.

“Not much. But suggestive. Quite suggestive. If you’ll excuse my saying
so, you’re a curious young couple. I don’t know--you might succeed where
others have failed ... I believe in luck, you know--always have....”

He paused a moment, and then went on.

“Well, how about it? You’re out for adventure. How would you like
to work for me? All quite unofficial, you know. Expenses paid, and a
moderate screw?”

Tuppence gazed at him, her lips parted, her eyes growing wider and
wider.

“What should we have to do?” she breathed.

Mr. Carter smiled.

“Just go on with what you’re doing now. _Find Jane Finn_.”

“Yes, but--who _is_ Jane Finn?”

Mr. Carter nodded gravely.

“Yes, you’re entitled to know that, I think.”

He leaned back in his chair, crossed his legs, brought the tips of his
fingers together, and began in a low monotone:

“Secret diplomacy (which, by the way, is nearly always bad policy!) does
not concern you. It will be sufficient to say that in the early days of
1915 a certain document came into being. It was the draft of a secret
agreement--treaty--call it what you like. It was drawn up ready for
signature by the various representatives, and drawn up in America--at
that time a neutral country. It was dispatched to England by a special
messenger selected for that purpose, a young fellow called Danvers. It
was hoped that the whole affair had been kept so secret that nothing
would have leaked out. That kind of hope is usually disappointed.
Somebody always talks!

“Danvers sailed for England on the _Lusitania_. He carried the precious
papers in an oilskin packet which he wore next his skin. It was on that
particular voyage that the _Lusitania_ was torpedoed and sunk. Danvers
was among the list of those missing. Eventually his body was washed
ashore, and identified beyond any possible doubt. But the oilskin packet
was missing!

“The question was, had it been taken from him, or had he himself
passed it on into another’s keeping? There were a few incidents that
strengthened the possibility of the latter theory. After the torpedo
struck the ship, in the few moments during the launching of the boats,
Danvers was seen speaking to a young American girl. No one actually
saw him pass anything to her, but he might have done so. It seems to me
quite likely that he entrusted the papers to this girl, believing that
she, as a woman, had a greater chance of bringing them safely to shore.

“But if so, where was the girl, and what had she done with the papers?
By later advice from America it seemed likely that Danvers had been
closely shadowed on the way over. Was this girl in league with his
enemies? Or had she, in her turn, been shadowed and either tricked or
forced into handing over the precious packet?

“We set to work to trace her out. It proved unexpectedly difficult.
Her name was Jane Finn, and it duly appeared among the list of the
survivors, but the girl herself seemed to have vanished completely.
Inquiries into her antecedents did little to help us. She was an orphan,
and had been what we should call over here a pupil teacher in a small
school out West. Her passport had been made out for Paris, where she
was going to join the staff of a hospital. She had offered her services
voluntarily, and after some correspondence they had been accepted.
Having seen her name in the list of the saved from the _Lusitania_, the
staff of the hospital were naturally very surprised at her not arriving
to take up her billet, and at not hearing from her in any way.

“Well, every effort was made to trace the young lady--but all in vain.
We tracked her across Ireland, but nothing could be heard of her after
she set foot in England. No use was made of the draft treaty--as might
very easily have been done--and we therefore came to the conclusion that
Danvers had, after all, destroyed it. The war entered on another phase,
the diplomatic aspect changed accordingly, and the treaty was never
redrafted. Rumours as to its existence were emphatically denied. The
disappearance of Jane Finn was forgotten and the whole affair was lost
in oblivion.”

Mr. Carter paused, and Tuppence broke in impatiently:

“But why has it all cropped up again? The war’s over.”

A hint of alertness came into Mr. Carter’s manner.

“Because it seems that the papers were not destroyed after all, and that
they might be resurrected to-day with a new and deadly significance.”

Tuppence stared. Mr. Carter nodded.

“Yes, five years ago, that draft treaty was a weapon in our hands;
to-day it is a weapon against us. It was a gigantic blunder. If its
terms were made public, it would mean disaster.... It might possibly
bring about another war--not with Germany this time! That is an extreme
possibility, and I do not believe in its likelihood myself, but that
document undoubtedly implicates a number of our statesmen whom we cannot
afford to have discredited in any way at the present moment. As a party
cry for Labour it would be irresistible, and a Labour Government at this
juncture would, in my opinion, be a grave disability for British trade,
but that is a mere nothing to the _real_ danger.”

He paused, and then said quietly:

“You may perhaps have heard or read that there is Bolshevist influence
at work behind the present Labour unrest?”

Tuppence nodded.

“That is the truth. Bolshevist gold is pouring into this country for the
specific purpose of procuring a Revolution. And there is a certain man,
a man whose real name is unknown to us, who is working in the dark for
his own ends. The Bolshevists are behind the Labour unrest--but this
man is _behind the Bolshevists_. Who is he? We do not know. He is always
spoken of by the unassuming title of ‘Mr. Brown.’ But one thing is
certain, he is the master criminal of this age. He controls a marvellous
organization. Most of the Peace propaganda during the war was originated
and financed by him. His spies are everywhere.”

“A naturalized German?” asked Tommy.

“On the contrary, I have every reason to believe he is an Englishman. He
was pro-German, as he would have been pro-Boer. What he seeks to attain
we do not know--probably supreme power for himself, of a kind unique in
history. We have no clue as to his real personality. It is reported that
even his own followers are ignorant of it. Where we have come across his
tracks, he has always played a secondary part. Somebody else assumes
the chief rôle. But afterwards we always find that there has been some
nonentity, a servant or a clerk, who has remained in the background
unnoticed, and that the elusive Mr. Brown has escaped us once more.”

“Oh!” Tuppence jumped. “I wonder----”

“Yes?”

“I remember in Mr. Whittington’s office. The clerk--he called him Brown.
You don’t think----”

Carter nodded thoughtfully.

“Very likely. A curious point is that the name is usually mentioned. An
idiosyncrasy of genius. Can you describe him at all?”

“I really didn’t notice. He was quite ordinary--just like anyone else.”

Mr. Carter sighed in his tired manner.

“That is the invariable description of Mr. Brown! Brought a telephone
message to the man Whittington, did he? Notice a telephone in the outer
office?”

Tuppence thought.

“No, I don’t think I did.”

“Exactly. That ‘message’ was Mr. Brown’s way of giving an order to his
subordinate. He overheard the whole conversation of course. Was it after
that that Whittington handed you over the money, and told you to come
the following day?”

Tuppence nodded.

“Yes, undoubtedly the hand of Mr. Brown!” Mr. Carter paused. “Well,
there it is, you see what you are pitting yourselves against? Possibly
the finest criminal brain of the age. I don’t quite like it, you know.
You’re such young things, both of you. I shouldn’t like anything to
happen to you.”

“It won’t,” Tuppence assured him positively.

“I’ll look after her, sir,” said Tommy.

“And _I_‘ll look after _you_,” retorted Tuppence, resenting the manly
assertion.

“Well, then, look after each other,” said Mr. Carter, smiling. “Now
let’s get back to business. There’s something mysterious about this
draft treaty that we haven’t fathomed yet. We’ve been threatened with
it--in plain and unmistakable terms. The Revolutionary element as good
as declare that it’s in their hands, and that they intend to produce it
at a given moment. On the other hand, they are clearly at fault about
many of its provisions. The Government consider it as mere bluff
on their part, and, rightly or wrongly, have stuck to the policy of
absolute denial. I’m not so sure. There have been hints, indiscreet
allusions, that seem to indicate that the menace is a real one. The
position is much as though they had got hold of an incriminating
document, but couldn’t read it because it was in cipher--but we know
that the draft treaty wasn’t in cipher--couldn’t be in the nature of
things--so that won’t wash. But there’s _something_. Of course, Jane
Finn may be dead for all we know--but I don’t think so. The curious
thing is that _they’re trying to get information about the girl from
us_.”

“What?”

“Yes. One or two little things have cropped up. And your story, little
lady, confirms my idea. They know we’re looking for Jane Finn. Well,
they’ll produce a Jane Finn of their own--say at a _pensionnat_ in
Paris.” Tuppence gasped, and Mr. Carter smiled. “No one knows in the
least what she looks like, so that’s all right. She’s primed with a
trumped-up tale, and her real business is to get as much information as
possible out of us. See the idea?”

“Then you think”--Tuppence paused to grasp the supposition fully--“that
it _was_ as Jane Finn that they wanted me to go to Paris?”

Mr. Carter smiled more wearily than ever.

“I believe in coincidences, you know,” he said.



CHAPTER V. MR. JULIUS P. HERSHEIMMER

“WELL,” said Tuppence, recovering herself, “it really seems as though it
were meant to be.”

Carter nodded.

“I know what you mean. I’m superstitious myself. Luck, and all that sort
of thing. Fate seems to have chosen you out to be mixed up in this.”

Tommy indulged in a chuckle.

“My word! I don’t wonder Whittington got the wind up when Tuppence
plumped out that name! I should have myself. But look here, sir, we’re
taking up an awful lot of your time. Have you any tips to give us before
we clear out?”

“I think not. My experts, working in stereotyped ways, have failed.
You will bring imagination and an open mind to the task. Don’t be
discouraged if that too does not succeed. For one thing there is a
likelihood of the pace being forced.”

Tuppence frowned uncomprehendingly.

“When you had that interview with Whittington, they had time before
them. I have information that the big _coup_ was planned for early in
the new year. But the Government is contemplating legislative action
which will deal effectually with the strike menace. They’ll get wind of
it soon, if they haven’t already, and it’s possible that that may bring
things to a head. I hope it will myself. The less time they have to
mature their plans the better. I’m just warning you that you haven’t
much time before you, and that you needn’t be cast down if you fail.
It’s not an easy proposition anyway. That’s all.”

Tuppence rose.

“I think we ought to be businesslike. What exactly can we count upon you
for, Mr. Carter?” Mr. Carter’s lips twitched slightly, but he replied
succinctly: “Funds within reason, detailed information on any point,
and _no official recognition_. I mean that if you get yourselves into
trouble with the police, I can’t officially help you out of it. You’re
on your own.”

Tuppence nodded sagely.

“I quite understand that. I’ll write out a list of the things I want to
know when I’ve had time to think. Now--about money----”

“Yes, Miss Tuppence. Do you want to say how much?”

“Not exactly. We’ve got plenty to go with for the present, but when we
want more----”

“It will be waiting for you.”

“Yes, but--I’m sure I don’t want to be rude about the Government if
you’ve got anything to do with it, but you know one really has the devil
of a time getting anything out of it! And if we have to fill up a blue
form and send it in, and then, after three months, they send us a green
one, and so on--well, that won’t be much use, will it?”

Mr. Carter laughed outright.

“Don’t worry, Miss Tuppence. You will send a personal demand to me here,
and the money, in notes, shall be sent by return of post. As to salary,
shall we say at the rate of three hundred a year? And an equal sum for
Mr. Beresford, of course.”

Tuppence beamed upon him.

“How lovely. You are kind. I do love money! I’ll keep beautiful accounts
of our expenses all debit and credit, and the balance on the right side,
and red line drawn sideways with the totals the same at the bottom. I
really know how to do it when I think.”

“I’m sure you do. Well, good-bye, and good luck to you both.”

He shook hands with them, and in another minute they were descending the
steps of 27 Carshalton Terrace with their heads in a whirl.

“Tommy! Tell me at once, who is ‘Mr. Carter’?”

Tommy murmured a name in her ear.

“Oh!” said Tuppence, impressed.

“And I can tell you, old bean, he’s IT!”

“Oh!” said Tuppence again. Then she added reflectively,

“I like him, don’t you? He looks so awfully tired and bored, and yet you
feel that underneath he’s just like steel, all keen and flashing. Oh!”
 She gave a skip. “Pinch me, Tommy, do pinch me. I can’t believe it’s
real!”

Mr. Beresford obliged.

“Ow! That’s enough! Yes, we’re not dreaming. We’ve got a job!”

“And what a job! The joint venture has really begun.”

“It’s more respectable than I thought it would be,” said Tuppence
thoughtfully.

“Luckily I haven’t got your craving for crime! What time is it? Let’s
have lunch--oh!”

The same thought sprang to the minds of each. Tommy voiced it first.

“Julius P. Hersheimmer!”

“We never told Mr. Carter about hearing from him.”

“Well, there wasn’t much to tell--not till we’ve seen him. Come on, we’d
better take a taxi.”

“Now who’s being extravagant?”

“All expenses paid, remember. Hop in.”

“At any rate, we shall make a better effect arriving this way,” said
Tuppence, leaning back luxuriously. “I’m sure blackmailers never arrive
in buses!”

“We’ve ceased being blackmailers,” Tommy pointed out.

“I’m not sure I have,” said Tuppence darkly.

On inquiring for Mr. Hersheimmer, they were at once taken up to his
suite. An impatient voice cried “Come in” in answer to the page-boy’s
knock, and the lad stood aside to let them pass in.

Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer was a great deal younger than either Tommy or
Tuppence had pictured him. The girl put him down as thirty-five. He
was of middle height, and squarely built to match his jaw. His face was
pugnacious but pleasant. No one could have mistaken him for anything but
an American, though he spoke with very little accent.

“Get my note? Sit down and tell me right away all you know about my
cousin.”

“Your cousin?”

“Sure thing. Jane Finn.”

“Is she your cousin?”

“My father and her mother were brother and sister,” explained Mr.
Hersheimmer meticulously.

“Oh!” cried Tuppence. “Then you know where she is?”

“No!” Mr. Hersheimmer brought down his fist with a bang on the table.
“I’m darned if I do! Don’t you?”

“We advertised to receive information, not to give it,” said Tuppence
severely.

“I guess I know that. I can read. But I thought maybe it was her back
history you were after, and that you’d know where she was now?”

“Well, we wouldn’t mind hearing her back history,” said Tuppence
guardedly.

But Mr. Hersheimmer seemed to grow suddenly suspicious.

“See here,” he declared. “This isn’t Sicily! No demanding ransom or
threatening to crop her ears if I refuse. These are the British Isles,
so quit the funny business, or I’ll just sing out for that beautiful big
British policeman I see out there in Piccadilly.”

Tommy hastened to explain.

“We haven’t kidnapped your cousin. On the contrary, we’re trying to find
her. We’re employed to do so.”

Mr. Hersheimmer leant back in his chair.

“Put me wise,” he said succinctly.

Tommy fell in with this demand in so far as he gave him a guarded
version of the disappearance of Jane Finn, and of the possibility of her
having been mixed up unawares in “some political show.” He alluded to
Tuppence and himself as “private inquiry agents” commissioned to find
her, and added that they would therefore be glad of any details Mr.
Hersheimmer could give them.

That gentleman nodded approval.

“I guess that’s all right. I was just a mite hasty. But London gets my
goat! I only know little old New York. Just trot out your questions and
I’ll answer.”

For the moment this paralysed the Young Adventurers, but Tuppence,
recovering herself, plunged boldly into the breach with a reminiscence
culled from detective fiction.

“When did you last see the dece--your cousin, I mean?”

“Never seen her,” responded Mr. Hersheimmer.

“What?” demanded Tommy, astonished.

Hersheimmer turned to him.

“No, sir. As I said before, my father and her mother were brother and
sister, just as you might be”--Tommy did not correct this view of their
relationship--“but they didn’t always get on together. And when my aunt
made up her mind to marry Amos Finn, who was a poor school teacher out
West, my father was just mad! Said if he made his pile, as he seemed
in a fair way to do, she’d never see a cent of it. Well, the upshot was
that Aunt Jane went out West and we never heard from her again.

“The old man _did_ pile it up. He went into oil, and he went into steel,
and he played a bit with railroads, and I can tell you he made Wall
Street sit up!” He paused. “Then he died--last fall--and I got the
dollars. Well, would you believe it, my conscience got busy! Kept
knocking me up and saying: What about your Aunt Jane, way out West? It
worried me some. You see, I figured it out that Amos Finn would never
make good. He wasn’t the sort. End of it was, I hired a man to hunt her
down. Result, she was dead, and Amos Finn was dead, but they’d left a
daughter--Jane--who’d been torpedoed in the _Lusitania_ on her way to
Paris. She was saved all right, but they didn’t seem able to hear of her
over this side. I guessed they weren’t hustling any, so I thought I’d
come along over, and speed things up. I phoned Scotland Yard and the
Admiralty first thing. The Admiralty rather choked me off, but Scotland
Yard were very civil--said they would make inquiries, even sent a man
round this morning to get her photograph. I’m off to Paris to-morrow,
just to see what the Prefecture is doing. I guess if I go to and fro
hustling them, they ought to get busy!”

The energy of Mr. Hersheimmer was tremendous. They bowed before it.

“But say now,” he ended, “you’re not after her for anything? Contempt of
court, or something British? A proud-spirited young American girl might
find your rules and regulations in war time rather irksome, and get up
against it. If that’s the case, and there’s such a thing as graft in
this country, I’ll buy her off.”

Tuppence reassured him.

“That’s good. Then we can work together. What about some lunch? Shall we
have it up here, or go down to the restaurant?”

Tuppence expressed a preference for the latter, and Julius bowed to her
decision.

Oysters had just given place to Sole Colbert when a card was brought to
Hersheimmer.

“Inspector Japp, C.I.D. Scotland Yard again. Another man this time. What
does he expect I can tell him that I didn’t tell the first chap? I hope
they haven’t lost that photograph. That Western photographer’s place was
burned down and all his negatives destroyed--this is the only copy in
existence. I got it from the principal of the college there.”

An unformulated dread swept over Tuppence.

“You--you don’t know the name of the man who came this morning?”

“Yes, I do. No, I don’t. Half a second. It was on his card. Oh, I know!
Inspector Brown. Quiet, unassuming sort of chap.”



CHAPTER VI. A PLAN OF CAMPAIGN

A veil might with profit be drawn over the events of the next half-hour.
Suffice it to say that no such person as “Inspector Brown” was known to
Scotland Yard. The photograph of Jane Finn, which would have been of
the utmost value to the police in tracing her, was lost beyond recovery.
Once again “Mr. Brown” had triumphed.

The immediate result of this set-back was to effect a _rapprochement_
between Julius Hersheimmer and the Young Adventurers. All barriers went
down with a crash, and Tommy and Tuppence felt they had known the young
American all their lives. They abandoned the discreet reticence of
“private inquiry agents,” and revealed to him the whole history of
the joint venture, whereat the young man declared himself “tickled to
death.”

He turned to Tuppence at the close of the narration.

“I’ve always had a kind of idea that English girls were just a mite
moss-grown. Old-fashioned and sweet, you know, but scared to move round
without a footman or a maiden aunt. I guess I’m a bit behind the times!”

The upshot of these confidential relations was that Tommy and Tuppence
took up their abode forthwith at the _Ritz_, in order, as Tuppence put
it, to keep in touch with Jane Finn’s only living relation. “And put
like that,” she added confidentially to Tommy, “nobody could boggle at
the expense!”

Nobody did, which was the great thing.

“And now,” said the young lady on the morning after their installation,
“to work!”

Mr. Beresford put down the _Daily Mail_, which he was reading, and
applauded with somewhat unnecessary vigour. He was politely requested by
his colleague not to be an ass.

“Dash it all, Tommy, we’ve got to _do_ something for our money.”

Tommy sighed.

“Yes, I fear even the dear old Government will not support us at the
_Ritz_ in idleness for ever.”

“Therefore, as I said before, we must _do_ something.”

“Well,” said Tommy, picking up the _Daily Mail_ again, “_do_ it. I
shan’t stop you.”

“You see,” continued Tuppence. “I’ve been thinking----”

She was interrupted by a fresh bout of applause.

“It’s all very well for you to sit there being funny, Tommy. It would do
you no harm to do a little brain work too.”

“My union, Tuppence, my union! It does not permit me to work before 11
a.m.”

“Tommy, do you want something thrown at you? It is absolutely essential
that we should without delay map out a plan of campaign.”

“Hear, hear!”

“Well, let’s do it.”

Tommy laid his paper finally aside. “There’s something of the simplicity
of the truly great mind about you, Tuppence. Fire ahead. I’m listening.”

“To begin with,” said Tuppence, “what have we to go upon?”

“Absolutely nothing,” said Tommy cheerily.

“Wrong!” Tuppence wagged an energetic finger. “We have two distinct
clues.”

“What are they?”

“First clue, we know one of the gang.”

“Whittington?”

“Yes. I’d recognize him anywhere.”

“Hum,” said Tommy doubtfully, “I don’t call that much of a clue. You
don’t know where to look for him, and it’s about a thousand to one
against your running against him by accident.”

“I’m not so sure about that,” replied Tuppence thoughtfully. “I’ve often
noticed that once coincidences start happening they go on happening in
the most extraordinary way. I dare say it’s some natural law that we
haven’t found out. Still, as you say, we can’t rely on that. But there
_are_ places in London where simply every one is bound to turn up sooner
or later. Piccadilly Circus, for instance. One of my ideas was to take
up my stand there every day with a tray of flags.”

“What about meals?” inquired the practical Tommy.

“How like a man! What does mere food matter?”

“That’s all very well. You’ve just had a thundering good breakfast. No
one’s got a better appetite than you have, Tuppence, and by tea-time
you’d be eating the flags, pins and all. But, honestly, I don’t think
much of the idea. Whittington mayn’t be in London at all.”

“That’s true. Anyway, I think clue No. 2 is more promising.”

“Let’s hear it.”

“It’s nothing much. Only a Christian name--Rita. Whittington mentioned
it that day.”

“Are you proposing a third advertisement: Wanted, female crook,
answering to the name of Rita?”

“I am not. I propose to reason in a logical manner. That man, Danvers,
was shadowed on the way over, wasn’t he? And it’s more likely to have
been a woman than a man----”

“I don’t see that at all.”

“I am absolutely certain that it would be a woman, and a good-looking
one,” replied Tuppence calmly.

“On these technical points I bow to your decision,” murmured Mr.
Beresford.

“Now, obviously this woman, whoever she was, was saved.”

“How do you make that out?”

“If she wasn’t, how would they have known Jane Finn had got the papers?”

“Correct. Proceed, O Sherlock!”

“Now there’s just a chance, I admit it’s only a chance, that this woman
may have been ‘Rita.’”

“And if so?”

“If so, we’ve got to hunt through the survivors of the _Lusitania_ till
we find her.”

“Then the first thing is to get a list of the survivors.”

“I’ve got it. I wrote a long list of things I wanted to know, and sent
it to Mr. Carter. I got his reply this morning, and among other things
it encloses the official statement of those saved from the _Lusitania_.
How’s that for clever little Tuppence?”

“Full marks for industry, zero for modesty. But the great point is, is
there a ‘Rita’ on the list?”

“That’s just what I don’t know,” confessed Tuppence.

“Don’t know?”

“Yes. Look here.” Together they bent over the list. “You see, very few
Christian names are given. They’re nearly all Mrs. or Miss.”

Tommy nodded.

“That complicates matters,” he murmured thoughtfully.

Tuppence gave her characteristic “terrier” shake.

“Well, we’ve just got to get down to it, that’s all. We’ll start with
the London area. Just note down the addresses of any of the females who
live in London or roundabout, while I put on my hat.”

Five minutes later the young couple emerged into Piccadilly, and a few
seconds later a taxi was bearing them to The Laurels, Glendower Road,
N.7, the residence of Mrs. Edgar Keith, whose name figured first in a
list of seven reposing in Tommy’s pocket-book.

The Laurels was a dilapidated house, standing back from the road with
a few grimy bushes to support the fiction of a front garden. Tommy paid
off the taxi, and accompanied Tuppence to the front door bell. As she
was about to ring it, he arrested her hand.

“What are you going to say?”

“What am I going to say? Why, I shall say--Oh dear, I don’t know. It’s
very awkward.”

“I thought as much,” said Tommy with satisfaction. “How like a woman! No
foresight! Now just stand aside, and see how easily the mere male
deals with the situation.” He pressed the bell. Tuppence withdrew to a
suitable spot.

A slatternly looking servant, with an extremely dirty face and a pair of
eyes that did not match, answered the door.

Tommy had produced a notebook and pencil.

“Good morning,” he said briskly and cheerfully. “From the Hampstead
Borough Council. The new Voting Register. Mrs. Edgar Keith lives here,
does she not?”

“Yaas,” said the servant.

“Christian name?” asked Tommy, his pencil poised.

“Missus’s? Eleanor Jane.”

“Eleanor,” spelt Tommy. “Any sons or daughters over twenty-one?”

“Naow.”

“Thank you.” Tommy closed the notebook with a brisk snap. “Good
morning.”

The servant volunteered her first remark:

“I thought perhaps as you’d come about the gas,” she observed
cryptically, and shut the door.

Tommy rejoined his accomplice.

“You see, Tuppence,” he observed. “Child’s play to the masculine mind.”

“I don’t mind admitting that for once you’ve scored handsomely. I should
never have thought of that.”

“Good wheeze, wasn’t it? And we can repeat it _ad lib_.”

Lunch-time found the young couple attacking a steak and chips in an
obscure hostelry with avidity. They had collected a Gladys Mary and a
Marjorie, been baffled by one change of address, and had been forced to
listen to a long lecture on universal suffrage from a vivacious American
lady whose Christian name had proved to be Sadie.

“Ah!” said Tommy, imbibing a long draught of beer, “I feel better.
Where’s the next draw?”

The notebook lay on the table between them. Tuppence picked it up.

“Mrs. Vandemeyer,” she read, “20 South Audley Mansions. Miss Wheeler, 43
Clapington Road, Battersea. She’s a lady’s maid, as far as I remember,
so probably won’t be there, and, anyway, she’s not likely.”

“Then the Mayfair lady is clearly indicated as the first port of call.”

“Tommy, I’m getting discouraged.”

“Buck up, old bean. We always knew it was an outside chance. And,
anyway, we’re only starting. If we draw a blank in London, there’s a
fine tour of England, Ireland and Scotland before us.”

“True,” said Tuppence, her flagging spirits reviving. “And all expenses
paid! But, oh, Tommy, I do like things to happen quickly. So far,
adventure has succeeded adventure, but this morning has been dull as
dull.”

“You must stifle this longing for vulgar sensation, Tuppence. Remember
that if Mr. Brown is all he is reported to be, it’s a wonder that he has
not ere now done us to death. That’s a good sentence, quite a literary
flavour about it.”

“You’re really more conceited than I am--with less excuse! Ahem! But it
certainly is queer that Mr. Brown has not yet wreaked vengeance upon us.
(You see, I can do it too.) We pass on our way unscathed.”

“Perhaps he doesn’t think us worth bothering about,” suggested the young
man simply.

Tuppence received the remark with great disfavour.

“How horrid you are, Tommy. Just as though we didn’t count.”

“Sorry, Tuppence. What I meant was that we work like moles in the dark,
and that he has no suspicion of our nefarious schemes. Ha ha!”

“Ha ha!” echoed Tuppence approvingly, as she rose.

South Audley Mansions was an imposing-looking block of flats just off
Park Lane. No. 20 was on the second floor.

Tommy had by this time the glibness born of practice. He rattled off
the formula to the elderly woman, looking more like a housekeeper than a
servant, who opened the door to him.

“Christian name?”

“Margaret.”

Tommy spelt it, but the other interrupted him.

“No, _g u e_.”

“Oh, Marguerite; French way, I see.” He paused, then plunged boldly. “We
had her down as Rita Vandemeyer, but I suppose that’s incorrect?”

“She’s mostly called that, sir, but Marguerite’s her name.”

“Thank you. That’s all. Good morning.”

Hardly able to contain his excitement, Tommy hurried down the stairs.
Tuppence was waiting at the angle of the turn.

“You heard?”

“Yes. Oh, _Tommy!_”

Tommy squeezed her arm sympathetically.

“I know, old thing. I feel the same.”

“It’s--it’s so lovely to think of things--and then for them really to
happen!” cried Tuppence enthusiastically.

Her hand was still in Tommy’s. They had reached the entrance hall. There
were footsteps on the stairs above them, and voices.

Suddenly, to Tommy’s complete surprise, Tuppence dragged him into the
little space by the side of the lift where the shadow was deepest.

“What the----”

“Hush!”

Two men came down the stairs and passed out through the entrance.
Tuppence’s hand closed tighter on Tommy’s arm.

“Quick--follow them. I daren’t. He might recognize me. I don’t know who
the other man is, but the bigger of the two was Whittington.”



CHAPTER VII. THE HOUSE IN SOHO

WHITTINGTON and his companion were walking at a good pace. Tommy started
in pursuit at once, and was in time to see them turn the corner of the
street. His vigorous strides soon enabled him to gain upon them, and by
the time he, in his turn, reached the corner the distance between them
was sensibly lessened. The small Mayfair streets were comparatively
deserted, and he judged it wise to content himself with keeping them in
sight.

The sport was a new one to him. Though familiar with the technicalities
from a course of novel reading, he had never before attempted to
“follow” anyone, and it appeared to him at once that, in actual
practice, the proceeding was fraught with difficulties. Supposing, for
instance, that they should suddenly hail a taxi? In books, you simply
leapt into another, promised the driver a sovereign--or its modern
equivalent--and there you were. In actual fact, Tommy foresaw that it
was extremely likely there would be no second taxi. Therefore he
would have to run. What happened in actual fact to a young man who ran
incessantly and persistently through the London streets? In a main road
he might hope to create the illusion that he was merely running for a
bus. But in these obscure aristocratic byways he could not but feel that
an officious policeman might stop him to explain matters.

At this juncture in his thoughts a taxi with flag erect turned the
corner of the street ahead. Tommy held his breath. Would they hail it?

He drew a sigh of relief as they allowed it to pass unchallenged. Their
course was a zigzag one designed to bring them as quickly as possible
to Oxford Street. When at length they turned into it, proceeding in an
easterly direction, Tommy slightly increased his pace. Little by little
he gained upon them. On the crowded pavement there was little chance of
his attracting their notice, and he was anxious if possible to catch
a word or two of their conversation. In this he was completely
foiled; they spoke low and the din of the traffic drowned their voices
effectually.

Just before the Bond Street Tube station they crossed the road, Tommy,
unperceived, faithfully at their heels, and entered the big Lyons’.
There they went up to the first floor, and sat at a small table in the
window. It was late, and the place was thinning out. Tommy took a seat
at the table next to them, sitting directly behind Whittington in case
of recognition. On the other hand, he had a full view of the second man
and studied him attentively. He was fair, with a weak, unpleasant face,
and Tommy put him down as being either a Russian or a Pole. He was
probably about fifty years of age, his shoulders cringed a little as he
talked, and his eyes, small and crafty, shifted unceasingly.

Having already lunched heartily, Tommy contented himself with ordering
a Welsh rarebit and a cup of coffee. Whittington ordered a substantial
lunch for himself and his companion; then, as the waitress withdrew, he
moved his chair a little closer to the table and began to talk earnestly
in a low voice. The other man joined in. Listen as he would, Tommy could
only catch a word here and there; but the gist of it seemed to be some
directions or orders which the big man was impressing on his companion,
and with which the latter seemed from time to time to disagree.
Whittington addressed the other as Boris.

Tommy caught the word “Ireland” several times, also “propaganda,” but
of Jane Finn there was no mention. Suddenly, in a lull in the clatter of
the room, he got one phrase entire. Whittington was speaking. “Ah, but
you don’t know Flossie. She’s a marvel. An archbishop would swear she
was his own mother. She gets the voice right every time, and that’s
really the principal thing.”

Tommy did not hear Boris’s reply, but in response to it Whittington said
something that sounded like: “Of course--only in an emergency....”

Then he lost the thread again. But presently the phrases became distinct
again whether because the other two had insensibly raised their voices,
or because Tommy’s ears were getting more attuned, he could not tell.
But two words certainly had a most stimulating effect upon the listener.
They were uttered by Boris and they were: “Mr. Brown.”

Whittington seemed to remonstrate with him, but he merely laughed.

“Why not, my friend? It is a name most respectable--most common. Did
he not choose it for that reason? Ah, I should like to meet him--Mr.
Brown.”

There was a steely ring in Whittington’s voice as he replied:

“Who knows? You may have met him already.”

“Bah!” retorted the other. “That is children’s talk--a fable for the
police. Do you know what I say to myself sometimes? That he is a fable
invented by the Inner Ring, a bogy to frighten us with. It might be so.”

“And it might not.”

“I wonder ... or is it indeed true that he is with us and amongst us,
unknown to all but a chosen few? If so, he keeps his secret well. And
the idea is a good one, yes. We never know. We look at each other--
_one of us is Mr. Brown_--which? He commands--but also he serves. Among
us--in the midst of us. And no one knows which he is....”

With an effort the Russian shook off the vagary of his fancy. He looked
at his watch.

“Yes,” said Whittington. “We might as well go.”

He called the waitress and asked for his bill. Tommy did likewise, and a
few moments later was following the two men down the stairs.

Outside, Whittington hailed a taxi, and directed the driver to go to
Waterloo.

Taxis were plentiful here, and before Whittington’s had driven off
another was drawing up to the curb in obedience to Tommy’s peremptory
hand.

“Follow that other taxi,” directed the young man. “Don’t lose it.”

The elderly chauffeur showed no interest. He merely grunted and jerked
down his flag. The drive was uneventful. Tommy’s taxi came to rest at
the departure platform just after Whittington’s. Tommy was behind him at
the booking-office. He took a first-class single ticket to Bournemouth,
Tommy did the same. As he emerged, Boris remarked, glancing up at the
clock: “You are early. You have nearly half an hour.”

Boris’s words had aroused a new train of thought in Tommy’s mind.
Clearly Whittington was making the journey alone, while the other
remained in London. Therefore he was left with a choice as to which he
would follow. Obviously, he could not follow both of them unless----
Like Boris, he glanced up at the clock, and then to the announcement
board of the trains. The Bournemouth train left at 3.30. It was now ten
past. Whittington and Boris were walking up and down by the bookstall.
He gave one doubtful look at them, then hurried into an adjacent
telephone box. He dared not waste time in trying to get hold of
Tuppence. In all probability she was still in the neighbourhood of South
Audley Mansions. But there remained another ally. He rang up the _Ritz_
and asked for Julius Hersheimmer. There was a click and a buzz. Oh, if
only the young American was in his room! There was another click, and
then “Hello” in unmistakable accents came over the wire.

“That you, Hersheimmer? Beresford speaking. I’m at Waterloo. I’ve
followed Whittington and another man here. No time to explain.
Whittington’s off to Bournemouth by the 3.30. Can you get there by
then?”

The reply was reassuring.

“Sure. I’ll hustle.”

The telephone rang off. Tommy put back the receiver with a sigh of
relief. His opinion of Julius’s power of hustling was high. He felt
instinctively that the American would arrive in time.

Whittington and Boris were still where he had left them. If Boris
remained to see his friend off, all was well. Then Tommy fingered his
pocket thoughtfully. In spite of the carte blanche assured to him, he
had not yet acquired the habit of going about with any considerable sum
of money on him. The taking of the first-class ticket to Bournemouth
had left him with only a few shillings in his pocket. It was to be hoped
that Julius would arrive better provided.

In the meantime, the minutes were creeping by: 3.15, 3.20, 3.25, 3.27.
Supposing Julius did not get there in time. 3.29.... Doors were banging.
Tommy felt cold waves of despair pass over him. Then a hand fell on his
shoulder.

“Here I am, son. Your British traffic beats description! Put me wise to
the crooks right away.”

“That’s Whittington--there, getting in now, that big dark man. The other
is the foreign chap he’s talking to.”

“I’m on to them. Which of the two is my bird?”

Tommy had thought out this question.

“Got any money with you?”

Julius shook his head, and Tommy’s face fell.

“I guess I haven’t more than three or four hundred dollars with me at
the moment,” explained the American.

Tommy gave a faint whoop of relief.

“Oh, Lord, you millionaires! You don’t talk the same language! Climb
aboard the lugger. Here’s your ticket. Whittington’s your man.”

“Me for Whittington!” said Julius darkly. The train was just starting
as he swung himself aboard. “So long, Tommy.” The train slid out of the
station.

Tommy drew a deep breath. The man Boris was coming along the platform
towards him. Tommy allowed him to pass and then took up the chase once
more.

From Waterloo Boris took the tube as far as Piccadilly Circus. Then he
walked up Shaftesbury Avenue, finally turning off into the maze of mean
streets round Soho. Tommy followed him at a judicious distance.

They reached at length a small dilapidated square. The houses there had
a sinister air in the midst of their dirt and decay. Boris looked round,
and Tommy drew back into the shelter of a friendly porch. The place was
almost deserted. It was a cul-de-sac, and consequently no traffic passed
that way. The stealthy way the other had looked round stimulated Tommy’s
imagination. From the shelter of the doorway he watched him go up the
steps of a particularly evil-looking house and rap sharply, with a
peculiar rhythm, on the door. It was opened promptly, he said a word or
two to the doorkeeper, then passed inside. The door was shut to again.

It was at this juncture that Tommy lost his head. What he ought to have
done, what any sane man would have done, was to remain patiently where
he was and wait for his man to come out again. What he did do was
entirely foreign to the sober common sense which was, as a rule, his
leading characteristic. Something, as he expressed it, seemed to snap in
his brain. Without a moment’s pause for reflection he, too, went up the
steps, and reproduced as far as he was able the peculiar knock.

The door swung open with the same promptness as before. A
villainous-faced man with close-cropped hair stood in the doorway.

“Well?” he grunted.

It was at that moment that the full realization of his folly began to
come home to Tommy. But he dared not hesitate. He seized at the first
words that came into his mind.

“Mr. Brown?” he said.

To his surprise the man stood aside.

“Upstairs,” he said, jerking his thumb over his shoulder, “second door
on your left.”



CHAPTER VIII. THE ADVENTURES OF TOMMY

TAKEN aback though he was by the man’s words, Tommy did not hesitate.
If audacity had successfully carried him so far, it was to be hoped
it would carry him yet farther. He quietly passed into the house and
mounted the ramshackle staircase. Everything in the house was filthy
beyond words. The grimy paper, of a pattern now indistinguishable,
hung in loose festoons from the wall. In every angle was a grey mass of
cobweb.

Tommy proceeded leisurely. By the time he reached the bend of the
staircase, he had heard the man below disappear into a back room.
Clearly no suspicion attached to him as yet. To come to the house and
ask for “Mr. Brown” appeared indeed to be a reasonable and natural
proceeding.

At the top of the stairs Tommy halted to consider his next move. In
front of him ran a narrow passage, with doors opening on either side of
it. From the one nearest him on the left came a low murmur of voices.
It was this room which he had been directed to enter. But what held
his glance fascinated was a small recess immediately on his right,
half concealed by a torn velvet curtain. It was directly opposite the
left-handed door and, owing to its angle, it also commanded a good view
of the upper part of the staircase. As a hiding-place for one or, at a
pinch, two men, it was ideal, being about two feet deep and three feet
wide. It attracted Tommy mightily. He thought things over in his usual
slow and steady way, deciding that the mention of “Mr. Brown” was not a
request for an individual, but in all probability a password used by
the gang. His lucky use of it had gained him admission. So far he had
aroused no suspicion. But he must decide quickly on his next step.

Suppose he were boldly to enter the room on the left of the passage.
Would the mere fact of his having been admitted to the house be
sufficient? Perhaps a further password would be required, or, at any
rate, some proof of identity. The doorkeeper clearly did not know all
the members of the gang by sight, but it might be different upstairs.
On the whole it seemed to him that luck had served him very well so far,
but that there was such a thing as trusting it too far. To enter
that room was a colossal risk. He could not hope to sustain his part
indefinitely; sooner or later he was almost bound to betray himself, and
then he would have thrown away a vital chance in mere foolhardiness.

A repetition of the signal knock sounded on the door below, and Tommy,
his mind made up, slipped quickly into the recess, and cautiously drew
the curtain farther across so that it shielded him completely from
sight. There were several rents and slits in the ancient material which
afforded him a good view. He would watch events, and any time he chose
could, after all, join the assembly, modelling his behaviour on that of
the new arrival.

The man who came up the staircase with a furtive, soft-footed tread was
quite unknown to Tommy. He was obviously of the very dregs of society.
The low beetling brows, and the criminal jaw, the bestiality of the
whole countenance were new to the young man, though he was a type that
Scotland Yard would have recognized at a glance.

The man passed the recess, breathing heavily as he went. He stopped at
the door opposite, and gave a repetition of the signal knock. A voice
inside called out something, and the man opened the door and passed in,
affording Tommy a momentary glimpse of the room inside. He thought there
must be about four or five people seated round a long table that took up
most of the space, but his attention was caught and held by a tall man
with close-cropped hair and a short, pointed, naval-looking beard,
who sat at the head of the table with papers in front of him. As the
new-comer entered he glanced up, and with a correct, but curiously
precise enunciation, which attracted Tommy’s notice, he asked:

“Your number, comrade?”

“Fourteen, gov’nor,” replied the other hoarsely.

“Correct.”

The door shut again.

“If that isn’t a Hun, I’m a Dutchman!” said Tommy to himself. “And
running the show darned systematically too--as they always do. Lucky I
didn’t roll in. I’d have given the wrong number, and there would have
been the deuce to pay. No, this is the place for me. Hullo, here’s
another knock.”

This visitor proved to be of an entirely different type to the last.
Tommy recognized in him an Irish Sinn Feiner. Certainly Mr. Brown’s
organization was a far-reaching concern. The common criminal, the
well-bred Irish gentleman, the pale Russian, and the efficient German
master of the ceremonies! Truly a strange and sinister gathering! Who
was this man who held in his finger these curiously variegated links of
an unknown chain?

In this case, the procedure was exactly the same. The signal knock, the
demand for a number, and the reply “Correct.”

Two knocks followed in quick succession on the door below. The first man
was quite unknown to Tommy, who put him down as a city clerk. A quiet,
intelligent-looking man, rather shabbily dressed. The second was of the
working classes, and his face was vaguely familiar to the young man.

Three minutes later came another, a man of commanding appearance,
exquisitely dressed, and evidently well born. His face, again, was not
unknown to the watcher, though he could not for the moment put a name to
it.

After his arrival there was a long wait. In fact Tommy concluded that
the gathering was now complete, and was just cautiously creeping out
from his hiding-place, when another knock sent him scuttling back to
cover.

This last-comer came up the stairs so quietly that he was almost abreast
of Tommy before the young man had realized his presence.

He was a small man, very pale, with a gentle almost womanish air. The
angle of the cheek-bones hinted at his Slavonic ancestry, otherwise
there was nothing to indicate his nationality. As he passed the recess,
he turned his head slowly. The strange light eyes seemed to burn through
the curtain; Tommy could hardly believe that the man did not know he was
there and in spite of himself he shivered. He was no more fanciful than
the majority of young Englishmen, but he could not rid himself of the
impression that some unusually potent force emanated from the man. The
creature reminded him of a venomous snake.

A moment later his impression was proved correct. The new-comer knocked
on the door as all had done, but his reception was very different. The
bearded man rose to his feet, and all the others followed suit. The
German came forward and shook hands. His heels clicked together.

“We are honoured,” he said. “We are greatly honoured. I much feared that
it would be impossible.”

The other answered in a low voice that had a kind of hiss in it:

“There were difficulties. It will not be possible again, I fear. But one
meeting is essential--to define my policy. I can do nothing without--Mr.
Brown. He is here?”

The change in the German’s voice was audible as he replied with slight
hesitation:

“We have received a message. It is impossible for him to be present
in person.” He stopped, giving a curious impression of having left the
sentence unfinished.

A very slow smile overspread the face of the other. He looked round at a
circle of uneasy faces.

“Ah! I understand. I have read of his methods. He works in the dark and
trusts no one. But, all the same, it is possible that he is among us
now....” He looked round him again, and again that expression of fear
swept over the group. Each man seemed eyeing his neighbour doubtfully.

The Russian tapped his cheek.

“So be it. Let us proceed.”

The German seemed to pull himself together. He indicated the place he
had been occupying at the head of the table. The Russian demurred, but
the other insisted.

“It is the only possible place,” he said, “for--Number One. Perhaps
Number Fourteen will shut the door?”

In another moment Tommy was once more confronting bare wooden panels,
and the voices within had sunk once more to a mere undistinguishable
murmur. Tommy became restive. The conversation he had overheard had
stimulated his curiosity. He felt that, by hook or by crook, he must
hear more.

There was no sound from below, and it did not seem likely that the
doorkeeper would come upstairs. After listening intently for a minute or
two, he put his head round the curtain. The passage was deserted. Tommy
bent down and removed his shoes, then, leaving them behind the curtain,
he walked gingerly out on his stockinged feet, and kneeling down by
the closed door he laid his ear cautiously to the crack. To his intense
annoyance he could distinguish little more; just a chance word here and
there if a voice was raised, which merely served to whet his curiosity
still farther.

He eyed the handle of the door tentatively. Could he turn it by degrees
so gently and imperceptibly that those in the room would notice nothing?
He decided that with great care it could be done. Very slowly, a
fraction of an inch at a time, he moved it round, holding his breath in
his excessive care. A little more--a little more still--would it never
be finished? Ah! at last it would turn no farther.

He stayed so for a minute or two, then drew a deep breath, and pressed
it ever so slightly inward. The door did not budge. Tommy was annoyed.
If he had to use too much force, it would almost certainly creak.
He waited until the voices rose a little, then he tried again. Still
nothing happened. He increased the pressure. Had the beastly thing
stuck? Finally, in desperation, he pushed with all his might. But the
door remained firm, and at last the truth dawned upon him. It was locked
or bolted on the inside.

For a moment or two Tommy’s indignation got the better of him.

“Well, I’m damned!” he said. “What a dirty trick!”

As his indignation cooled, he prepared to face the situation. Clearly
the first thing to be done was to restore the handle to its original
position. If he let it go suddenly, the men inside would be almost
certain to notice it, so, with the same infinite pains, he reversed his
former tactics. All went well, and with a sigh of relief the young man
rose to his feet. There was a certain bulldog tenacity about Tommy that
made him slow to admit defeat. Checkmated for the moment, he was far
from abandoning the conflict. He still intended to hear what was going
on in the locked room. As one plan had failed, he must hunt about for
another.

He looked round him. A little farther along the passage on the left was
a second door. He slipped silently along to it. He listened for a moment
or two, then tried the handle. It yielded, and he slipped inside.

The room, which was untenanted, was furnished as a bedroom. Like
everything else in the house, the furniture was falling to pieces, and
the dirt was, if anything, more abundant.

But what interested Tommy was the thing he had hoped to find, a
communicating door between the two rooms, up on the left by the window.
Carefully closing the door into the passage behind him, he stepped
across to the other and examined it closely. The bolt was shot across
it. It was very rusty, and had clearly not been used for some time. By
gently wriggling it to and fro, Tommy managed to draw it back without
making too much noise. Then he repeated his former manœuvres with the
handle--this time with complete success. The door swung open--a crack,
a mere fraction, but enough for Tommy to hear what went on. There was a
velvet _portière_ on the inside of this door which prevented him from
seeing, but he was able to recognize the voices with a reasonable amount
of accuracy.

The Sinn Feiner was speaking. His rich Irish voice was unmistakable:

“That’s all very well. But more money is essential. No money--no
results!”

Another voice which Tommy rather thought was that of Boris replied:

“Will you guarantee that there _are_ results?”

“In a month from now--sooner or later as you wish--I will guarantee you
such a reign of terror in Ireland as shall shake the British Empire to
its foundations.”

There was a pause, and then came the soft, sibilant accents of Number
One:

“Good! You shall have the money. Boris, you will see to that.”

Boris asked a question:

“Via the Irish Americans, and Mr. Potter as usual?”

“I guess that’ll be all right!” said a new voice, with a transatlantic
intonation, “though I’d like to point out, here and now, that things
are getting a mite difficult. There’s not the sympathy there was, and
a growing disposition to let the Irish settle their own affairs without
interference from America.”

Tommy felt that Boris had shrugged his shoulders as he answered:

“Does that matter, since the money only nominally comes from the
States?”

“The chief difficulty is the landing of the ammunition,” said the Sinn
Feiner. “The money is conveyed in easily enough--thanks to our colleague
here.”

Another voice, which Tommy fancied was that of the tall,
commanding-looking man whose face had seemed familiar to him, said:

“Think of the feelings of Belfast if they could hear you!”

“That is settled, then,” said the sibilant tones. “Now, in the matter
of the loan to an English newspaper, you have arranged the details
satisfactorily, Boris?”

“I think so.”

“That is good. An official denial from Moscow will be forthcoming if
necessary.”

There was a pause, and then the clear voice of the German broke the
silence:

“I am directed by--Mr. Brown, to place the summaries of the reports
from the different unions before you. That of the miners is most
satisfactory. We must hold back the railways. There may be trouble with
the A.S.E.”

For a long time there was a silence, broken only by the rustle of papers
and an occasional word of explanation from the German. Then Tommy heard
the light tap-tap of fingers, drumming on the table.

“And--the date, my friend?” said Number One.

“The 29th.”

The Russian seemed to consider:

“That is rather soon.”

“I know. But it was settled by the principal Labour leaders, and we
cannot seem to interfere too much. They must believe it to be entirely
their own show.”

The Russian laughed softly, as though amused.

“Yes, yes,” he said. “That is true. They must have no inkling that we
are using them for our own ends. They are honest men--and that is their
value to us. It is curious--but you cannot make a revolution without
honest men. The instinct of the populace is infallible.” He paused, and
then repeated, as though the phrase pleased him: “Every revolution has
had its honest men. They are soon disposed of afterwards.”

There was a sinister note in his voice.

The German resumed:

“Clymes must go. He is too far-seeing. Number Fourteen will see to
that.”

There was a hoarse murmur.

“That’s all right, gov’nor.” And then after a moment or two: “Suppose
I’m nabbed.”

“You will have the best legal talent to defend you,” replied the
German quietly. “But in any case you will wear gloves fitted with the
finger-prints of a notorious housebreaker. You have little to fear.”

“Oh, I ain’t afraid, gov’nor. All for the good of the cause. The streets
is going to run with blood, so they say.” He spoke with a grim relish.
“Dreams of it, sometimes, I does. And diamonds and pearls rolling about
in the gutter for anyone to pick up!”

Tommy heard a chair shifted. Then Number One spoke:

“Then all is arranged. We are assured of success?”

“I--think so.” But the German spoke with less than his usual confidence.

Number One’s voice held suddenly a dangerous quality:

“What has gone wrong?”

“Nothing; but----”

“But what?”

“The Labour leaders. Without them, as you say, we can do nothing. If
they do not declare a general strike on the 29th----”

“Why should they not?”

“As you’ve said, they’re honest. And, in spite of everything we’ve
done to discredit the Government in their eyes, I’m not sure that they
haven’t got a sneaking faith and belief in it.”

“But----”

“I know. They abuse it unceasingly. But, on the whole, public opinion
swings to the side of the Government. They will not go against it.”

Again the Russian’s fingers drummed on the table.

“To the point, my friend. I was given to understand that there was a
certain document in existence which assured success.”

“That is so. If that document were placed before the leaders, the result
would be immediate. They would publish it broadcast throughout England,
and declare for the revolution without a moment’s hesitation. The
Government would be broken finally and completely.”

“Then what more do you want?”

“The document itself,” said the German bluntly.

“Ah! It is not in your possession? But you know where it is?”

“No.”

“Does anyone know where it is?”

“One person--perhaps. And we are not sure of that even.”

“Who is this person?”

“A girl.”

Tommy held his breath.

“A girl?” The Russian’s voice rose contemptuously. “And you have not
made her speak? In Russia we have ways of making a girl talk.”

“This case is different,” said the German sullenly.

“How--different?” He paused a moment, then went on: “Where is the girl
now?”

“The girl?”

“Yes.”

“She is----”

But Tommy heard no more. A crashing blow descended on his head, and all
was darkness.



CHAPTER IX. TUPPENCE ENTERS DOMESTIC SERVICE

WHEN Tommy set forth on the trail of the two men, it took all Tuppence’s
self-command to refrain from accompanying him. However, she contained
herself as best she might, consoled by the reflection that her reasoning
had been justified by events. The two men had undoubtedly come from the
second floor flat, and that one slender thread of the name “Rita” had
set the Young Adventurers once more upon the track of the abductors of
Jane Finn.

The question was what to do next? Tuppence hated letting the grass grow
under her feet. Tommy was amply employed, and debarred from joining him
in the chase, the girl felt at a loose end. She retraced her steps
to the entrance hall of the mansions. It was now tenanted by a small
lift-boy, who was polishing brass fittings, and whistling the latest air
with a good deal of vigour and a reasonable amount of accuracy.

He glanced round at Tuppence’s entry. There was a certain amount of the
gamin element in the girl, at all events she invariably got on well
with small boys. A sympathetic bond seemed instantly to be formed. She
reflected that an ally in the enemy’s camp, so to speak, was not to be
despised.

“Well, William,” she remarked cheerfully, in the best approved
hospital-early-morning style, “getting a good shine up?”

The boy grinned responsively.

“Albert, miss,” he corrected.

“Albert be it,” said Tuppence. She glanced mysteriously round the hall.
The effect was purposely a broad one in case Albert should miss it. She
leaned towards the boy and dropped her voice: “I want a word with you,
Albert.”

Albert ceased operations on the fittings and opened his mouth slightly.

“Look! Do you know what this is?” With a dramatic gesture she flung back
the left side of her coat and exposed a small enamelled badge. It was
extremely unlikely that Albert would have any knowledge of it--indeed,
it would have been fatal for Tuppence’s plans, since the badge in
question was the device of a local training corps originated by the
archdeacon in the early days of the war. Its presence in Tuppence’s coat
was due to the fact that she had used it for pinning in some flowers a
day or two before. But Tuppence had sharp eyes, and had noted the corner
of a threepenny detective novel protruding from Albert’s pocket, and the
immediate enlargement of his eyes told her that her tactics were good,
and that the fish would rise to the bait.

“American Detective Force!” she hissed.

Albert fell for it.

“Lord!” he murmured ecstatically.

Tuppence nodded at him with the air of one who has established a
thorough understanding.

“Know who I’m after?” she inquired genially.

Albert, still round-eyed, demanded breathlessly:

“One of the flats?”

Tuppence nodded and jerked a thumb up the stairs.

“No. 20. Calls herself Vandemeyer. Vandemeyer! Ha! ha!”

Albert’s hand stole to his pocket.

“A crook?” he queried eagerly.

“A crook? I should say so. Ready Rita they call her in the States.”

“Ready Rita,” repeated Albert deliriously. “Oh, ain’t it just like the
pictures!”

It was. Tuppence was a great frequenter of the cinema.

“Annie always said as how she was a bad lot,” continued the boy.

“Who’s Annie?” inquired Tuppence idly.

“‘Ouse-parlourmaid. She’s leaving to-day. Many’s the time Annie’s said
to me: ‘Mark my words, Albert, I wouldn’t wonder if the police was to
come after her one of these days.’ Just like that. But she’s a stunner
to look at, ain’t she?”

“She’s some peach,” allowed Tuppence carelessly. “Finds it useful in her
lay-out, you bet. Has she been wearing any of the emeralds, by the way?”

“Emeralds? Them’s the green stones, isn’t they?”

Tuppence nodded.

“That’s what we’re after her for. You know old man Rysdale?”

Albert shook his head.

“Peter B. Rysdale, the oil king?”

“It seems sort of familiar to me.”

“The sparklers belonged to him. Finest collection of emeralds in the
world. Worth a million dollars!”

“Lumme!” came ecstatically from Albert. “It sounds more like the
pictures every minute.”

Tuppence smiled, gratified at the success of her efforts.

“We haven’t exactly proved it yet. But we’re after her. And”--she
produced a long-drawn-out wink--“I guess she won’t get away with the
goods this time.”

Albert uttered another ejaculation indicative of delight.

“Mind you, sonny, not a word of this,” said Tuppence suddenly. “I guess
I oughtn’t to have put you wise, but in the States we know a real smart
lad when we see one.”

“I’ll not breathe a word,” protested Albert eagerly. “Ain’t there
anything I could do? A bit of shadowing, maybe, or such like?”

Tuppence affected to consider, then shook her head.

“Not at the moment, but I’ll bear you in mind, son. What’s this about
the girl you say is leaving?”

“Annie? Regular turn up, they ‘ad. As Annie said, servants is some one
nowadays, and to be treated accordingly, and, what with her passing the
word round, she won’t find it so easy to get another.”

“Won’t she?” said Tuppence thoughtfully. “I wonder----”

An idea was dawning in her brain. She thought a minute or two, then
tapped Albert on the shoulder.

“See here, son, my brain’s got busy. How would it be if you mentioned
that you’d got a young cousin, or a friend of yours had, that might suit
the place. You get me?”

“I’m there,” said Albert instantly. “You leave it to me, miss, and I’ll
fix the whole thing up in two ticks.”

“Some lad!” commented Tuppence, with a nod of approval. “You might say
that the young woman could come in right away. You let me know, and if
it’s O.K. I’ll be round to-morrow at eleven o’clock.”

“Where am I to let you know to?”

“_Ritz_,” replied Tuppence laconically. “Name of Cowley.”

Albert eyed her enviously.

“It must be a good job, this tec business.”

“It sure is,” drawled Tuppence, “especially when old man Rysdale backs
the bill. But don’t fret, son. If this goes well, you shall come in on
the ground floor.”

With which promise she took leave of her new ally, and walked briskly
away from South Audley Mansions, well pleased with her morning’s work.

But there was no time to be lost. She went straight back to the _Ritz_
and wrote a few brief words to Mr. Carter. Having dispatched this, and
Tommy not having yet returned--which did not surprise her--she started
off on a shopping expedition which, with an interval for tea and
assorted creamy cakes, occupied her until well after six o’clock, and
she returned to the hotel jaded, but satisfied with her purchases.
Starting with a cheap clothing store, and passing through one or two
second-hand establishments, she had finished the day at a well-known
hairdresser’s. Now, in the seclusion of her bedroom, she unwrapped
that final purchase. Five minutes later she smiled contentedly at her
reflection in the glass. With an actress’s pencil she had slightly
altered the line of her eyebrows, and that, taken in conjunction with
the new luxuriant growth of fair hair above, so changed her appearance
that she felt confident that even if she came face to face with
Whittington he would not recognize her. She would wear elevators in her
shoes, and the cap and apron would be an even more valuable disguise.
From hospital experience she knew only too well that a nurse out of
uniform is frequently unrecognized by her patients.

“Yes,” said Tuppence aloud, nodding at the pert reflection in the glass,
“you’ll do.” She then resumed her normal appearance.

Dinner was a solitary meal. Tuppence was rather surprised at Tommy’s
non-return. Julius, too, was absent--but that to the girl’s mind was
more easily explained. His “hustling” activities were not confined
to London, and his abrupt appearances and disappearances were fully
accepted by the Young Adventurers as part of the day’s work. It
was quite on the cards that Julius P. Hersheimmer had left for
Constantinople at a moment’s notice if he fancied that a clue to his
cousin’s disappearance was to be found there. The energetic young
man had succeeded in making the lives of several Scotland Yard men
unbearable to them, and the telephone girls at the Admiralty had learned
to know and dread the familiar “Hullo!” He had spent three hours in
Paris hustling the Prefecture, and had returned from there imbued with
the idea, possibly inspired by a weary French official, that the true
clue to the mystery was to be found in Ireland.

“I dare say he’s dashed off there now,” thought Tuppence. “All very
well, but this is very dull for _me!_ Here I am bursting with news, and
absolutely no one to tell it to! Tommy might have wired, or something. I
wonder where he is. Anyway, he can’t have ‘lost the trail’ as they say.
That reminds me----” And Miss Cowley broke off in her meditations, and
summoned a small boy.

Ten minutes later the lady was ensconced comfortably on her bed,
smoking cigarettes and deep in the perusal of _Garnaby Williams, the Boy
Detective_, which, with other threepenny works of lurid fiction, she had
sent out to purchase. She felt, and rightly, that before the strain
of attempting further intercourse with Albert, it would be as well to
fortify herself with a good supply of local colour.

The morning brought a note from Mr. Carter:

“DEAR MISS TUPPENCE,

“You have made a splendid start, and I congratulate you. I feel, though,
that I should like to point out to you once more the risks you are
running, especially if you pursue the course you indicate. Those people
are absolutely desperate and incapable of either mercy or pity. I feel
that you probably underestimate the danger, and therefore warn you
again that I can promise you no protection. You have given us valuable
information, and if you choose to withdraw now no one could blame you.
At any rate, think the matter over well before you decide.

“If, in spite of my warnings, you make up your mind to go through with
it, you will find everything arranged. You have lived for two years with
Miss Dufferin, The Parsonage, Llanelly, and Mrs. Vandemeyer can apply to
her for a reference.

“May I be permitted a word or two of advice? Stick as near to the truth
as possible--it minimizes the danger of ‘slips.’ I suggest that you
should represent yourself to be what you are, a former V.A.D., who has
chosen domestic service as a profession. There are many such at the
present time. That explains away any incongruities of voice or manner
which otherwise might awaken suspicion.

“Whichever way you decide, good luck to you.

“Your sincere friend,

“MR. CARTER.”

Tuppence’s spirits rose mercurially. Mr. Carter’s warnings passed
unheeded. The young lady had far too much confidence in herself to pay
any heed to them.

With some reluctance she abandoned the interesting part she had sketched
out for herself. Although she had no doubts of her own powers to sustain
a role indefinitely, she had too much common sense not to recognize the
force of Mr. Carter’s arguments.

There was still no word or message from Tommy, but the morning post
brought a somewhat dirty postcard with the words: “It’s O.K.” scrawled
upon it.

At ten-thirty Tuppence surveyed with pride a slightly battered tin trunk
containing her new possessions. It was artistically corded. It was with
a slight blush that she rang the bell and ordered it to be placed in a
taxi. She drove to Paddington, and left the box in the cloak room.
She then repaired with a handbag to the fastnesses of the ladies’
waiting-room. Ten minutes later a metamorphosed Tuppence walked demurely
out of the station and entered a bus.

It was a few minutes past eleven when Tuppence again entered the hall
of South Audley Mansions. Albert was on the look-out, attending to his
duties in a somewhat desultory fashion. He did not immediately recognize
Tuppence. When he did, his admiration was unbounded.

“Blest if I’d have known you! That rig-out’s top-hole.”

“Glad you like it, Albert,” replied Tuppence modestly. “By the way, am I
your cousin, or am I not?”

“Your voice too,” cried the delighted boy. “It’s as English as anything!
No, I said as a friend of mine knew a young gal. Annie wasn’t best
pleased. She’s stopped on till to-day--to oblige, _she_ said, but really
it’s so as to put you against the place.”

“Nice girl,” said Tuppence.

Albert suspected no irony.

“She’s style about her, and keeps her silver a treat--but, my word,
ain’t she got a temper. Are you going up now, miss? Step inside the
lift. No. 20 did you say?” And he winked.

Tuppence quelled him with a stern glance, and stepped inside.

As she rang the bell of No. 20 she was conscious of Albert’s eyes slowly
descending beneath the level of the floor.

A smart young woman opened the door.

“I’ve come about the place,” said Tuppence.

“It’s a rotten place,” said the young woman without hesitation. “Regular
old cat--always interfering. Accused me of tampering with her letters.
Me! The flap was half undone anyway. There’s never anything in the
waste-paper basket--she burns everything. She’s a wrong ‘un, that’s what
she is. Swell clothes, but no class. Cook knows something about her--but
she won’t tell--scared to death of her. And suspicious! She’s on to you
in a minute if you as much as speak to a fellow. I can tell you----”

But what more Annie could tell, Tuppence was never destined to learn,
for at that moment a clear voice with a peculiarly steely ring to it
called:

“Annie!”

The smart young woman jumped as if she had been shot.

“Yes, ma’am.”

“Who are you talking to?”

“It’s a young woman about the situation, ma’am.”

“Show her in then. At once.”

“Yes, ma’am.”

Tuppence was ushered into a room on the right of the long passage. A
woman was standing by the fireplace. She was no longer in her first
youth, and the beauty she undeniably possessed was hardened and
coarsened. In her youth she must have been dazzling. Her pale gold hair,
owing a slight assistance to art, was coiled low on her neck, her eyes,
of a piercing electric blue, seemed to possess a faculty of boring into
the very soul of the person she was looking at. Her exquisite figure was
enhanced by a wonderful gown of indigo charmeuse. And yet, despite her
swaying grace, and the almost ethereal beauty of her face, you felt
instinctively the presence of something hard and menacing, a kind of
metallic strength that found expression in the tones of her voice and in
that gimlet-like quality of her eyes.

For the first time Tuppence felt afraid. She had not feared Whittington,
but this woman was different. As if fascinated, she watched the long
cruel line of the red curving mouth, and again she felt that sensation
of panic pass over her. Her usual self-confidence deserted her. Vaguely
she felt that deceiving this woman would be very different to deceiving
Whittington. Mr. Carter’s warning recurred to her mind. Here, indeed,
she might expect no mercy.

Fighting down that instinct of panic which urged her to turn tail and
run without further delay, Tuppence returned the lady’s gaze firmly and
respectfully.

As though that first scrutiny had been satisfactory, Mrs. Vandemeyer
motioned to a chair.

“You can sit down. How did you hear I wanted a house-parlourmaid?”

“Through a friend who knows the lift boy here. He thought the place
might suit me.”

Again that basilisk glance seemed to pierce her through.

“You speak like an educated girl?”

Glibly enough, Tuppence ran through her imaginary career on the lines
suggested by Mr. Carter. It seemed to her, as she did so, that the
tension of Mrs. Vandemeyer’s attitude relaxed.

“I see,” she remarked at length. “Is there anyone I can write to for a
reference?”

“I lived last with a Miss Dufferin, The Parsonage, Llanelly. I was with
her two years.”

“And then you thought you would get more money by coming to London,
I suppose? Well, it doesn’t matter to me. I will give you
£50--£60--whatever you want. You can come in at once?”

“Yes, ma’am. To-day, if you like. My box is at Paddington.”

“Go and fetch it in a taxi, then. It’s an easy place. I am out a good
deal. By the way, what’s your name?”

“Prudence Cooper, ma’am.”

“Very well, Prudence. Go away and fetch your box. I shall be out to
lunch. The cook will show you where everything is.”

“Thank you, ma’am.”

Tuppence withdrew. The smart Annie was not in evidence. In the hall
below a magnificent hall porter had relegated Albert to the background.
Tuppence did not even glance at him as she passed meekly out.

The adventure had begun, but she felt less elated than she had done
earlier in the morning. It crossed her mind that if the unknown Jane
Finn had fallen into the hands of Mrs. Vandemeyer, it was likely to have
gone hard with her.



CHAPTER X. ENTER SIR JAMES PEEL EDGERTON

TUPPENCE betrayed no awkwardness in her new duties. The daughters of the
archdeacon were well grounded in household tasks. They were also experts
in training a “raw girl,” the inevitable result being that the raw girl,
once trained, departed elsewhere where her newly acquired knowledge
commanded a more substantial remuneration than the archdeacon’s meagre
purse allowed.

Tuppence had therefore very little fear of proving inefficient. Mrs.
Vandemeyer’s cook puzzled her. She evidently went in deadly terror of
her mistress. The girl thought it probable that the other woman had some
hold over her. For the rest, she cooked like a _chef_, as Tuppence had
an opportunity of judging that evening. Mrs. Vandemeyer was expecting a
guest to dinner, and Tuppence accordingly laid the beautifully polished
table for two. She was a little exercised in her own mind as to this
visitor. It was highly possible that it might prove to be Whittington.
Although she felt fairly confident that he would not recognize her, yet
she would have been better pleased had the guest proved to be a total
stranger. However, there was nothing for it but to hope for the best.

At a few minutes past eight the front door bell rang, and Tuppence went
to answer it with some inward trepidation. She was relieved to see that
the visitor was the second of the two men whom Tommy had taken upon
himself to follow.

He gave his name as Count Stepanov. Tuppence announced him, and Mrs.
Vandemeyer rose from her seat on a low divan with a quick murmur of
pleasure.

“It is delightful to see you, Boris Ivanovitch,” she said.

“And you, madame!” He bowed low over her hand.

Tuppence returned to the kitchen.

“Count Stepanov, or some such,” she remarked, and affecting a frank and
unvarnished curiosity: “Who’s he?”

“A Russian gentleman, I believe.”

“Come here much?”

“Once in a while. What d’you want to know for?”

“Fancied he might be sweet on the missus, that’s all,” explained the
girl, adding with an appearance of sulkiness: “How you do take one up!”

“I’m not quite easy in my mind about the _soufflé_,” explained the
other.

“You know something,” thought Tuppence to herself, but aloud she only
said: “Going to dish up now? Right-o.”

Whilst waiting at table, Tuppence listened closely to all that was said.
She remembered that this was one of the men Tommy was shadowing when she
had last seen him. Already, although she would hardly admit it, she was
becoming uneasy about her partner. Where was he? Why had no word of any
kind come from him? She had arranged before leaving the _Ritz_ to have
all letters or messages sent on at once by special messenger to a small
stationer’s shop near at hand where Albert was to call in frequently.
True, it was only yesterday morning that she had parted from Tommy, and
she told herself that any anxiety on his behalf would be absurd. Still,
it was strange that he had sent no word of any kind.

But, listen as she might, the conversation presented no clue. Boris and
Mrs. Vandemeyer talked on purely indifferent subjects: plays they had
seen, new dances, and the latest society gossip. After dinner they
repaired to the small boudoir where Mrs. Vandemeyer, stretched on the
divan, looked more wickedly beautiful than ever. Tuppence brought in the
coffee and liqueurs and unwillingly retired. As she did so, she heard
Boris say:

“New, isn’t she?”

“She came in to-day. The other was a fiend. This girl seems all right.
She waits well.”

Tuppence lingered a moment longer by the door which she had carefully
neglected to close, and heard him say:

“Quite safe, I suppose?”

“Really, Boris, you are absurdly suspicious. I believe she’s the cousin
of the hall porter, or something of the kind. And nobody even dreams
that I have any connection with our--mutual friend, Mr. Brown.”

“For heaven’s sake, be careful, Rita. That door isn’t shut.”

“Well, shut it then,” laughed the woman.

Tuppence removed herself speedily.

She dared not absent herself longer from the back premises, but she
cleared away and washed up with a breathless speed acquired in hospital.
Then she slipped quietly back to the boudoir door. The cook, more
leisurely, was still busy in the kitchen and, if she missed the other,
would only suppose her to be turning down the beds.

Alas! The conversation inside was being carried on in too low a tone
to permit of her hearing anything of it. She dared not reopen the
door, however gently. Mrs. Vandemeyer was sitting almost facing it, and
Tuppence respected her mistress’s lynx-eyed powers of observation.

Nevertheless, she felt she would give a good deal to overhear what was
going on. Possibly, if anything unforeseen had happened, she might get
news of Tommy. For some moments she reflected desperately, then her
face brightened. She went quickly along the passage to Mrs. Vandemeyer’s
bedroom, which had long French windows leading on to a balcony that ran
the length of the flat. Slipping quickly through the window, Tuppence
crept noiselessly along till she reached the boudoir window. As she
had thought it stood a little ajar, and the voices within were plainly
audible.

Tuppence listened attentively, but there was no mention of anything
that could be twisted to apply to Tommy. Mrs. Vandemeyer and the Russian
seemed to be at variance over some matter, and finally the latter
exclaimed bitterly:

“With your persistent recklessness, you will end by ruining us!”

“Bah!” laughed the woman. “Notoriety of the right kind is the best way
of disarming suspicion. You will realize that one of these days--perhaps
sooner than you think!”

“In the meantime, you are going about everywhere with Peel Edgerton.
Not only is he, perhaps, the most celebrated K.C. in England, but his
special hobby is criminology! It is madness!”

“I know that his eloquence has saved untold men from the gallows,” said
Mrs. Vandemeyer calmly. “What of it? I may need his assistance in that
line myself some day. If so, how fortunate to have such a friend at
court--or perhaps it would be more to the point to say _in_ court.”

Boris got up and began striding up and down. He was very excited.

“You are a clever woman, Rita; but you are also a fool! Be guided by me,
and give up Peel Edgerton.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer shook her head gently.

“I think not.”

“You refuse?” There was an ugly ring in the Russian’s voice.

“I do.”

“Then, by Heaven,” snarled the Russian, “we will see----”

But Mrs. Vandemeyer also rose to her feet, her eyes flashing.

“You forget, Boris,” she said. “I am accountable to no one. I take my
orders only from--Mr. Brown.”

The other threw up his hands in despair.

“You are impossible,” he muttered. “Impossible! Already it may be too
late. They say Peel Edgerton can _smell_ a criminal! How do we know what
is at the bottom of his sudden interest in you? Perhaps even now his
suspicions are aroused. He guesses----”

Mrs. Vandemeyer eyed him scornfully.

“Reassure yourself, my dear Boris. He suspects nothing. With less than
your usual chivalry, you seem to forget that I am commonly accounted a
beautiful woman. I assure you that is all that interests Peel Edgerton.”

Boris shook his head doubtfully.

“He has studied crime as no other man in this kingdom has studied it. Do
you fancy that you can deceive him?”

Mrs. Vandemeyer’s eyes narrowed.

“If he is all that you say--it would amuse me to try!”

“Good heavens, Rita----”

“Besides,” added Mrs. Vandemeyer, “he is extremely rich. I am not one
who despises money. The ‘sinews of war,’ you know, Boris!”

“Money--money! That is always the danger with you, Rita. I believe you
would sell your soul for money. I believe----” He paused, then in a
low, sinister voice he said slowly: “Sometimes I believe that you would
sell-- _us!_”

Mrs. Vandemeyer smiled and shrugged her shoulders.

“The price, at any rate, would have to be enormous,” she said lightly.
“It would be beyond the power of anyone but a millionaire to pay.”

“Ah!” snarled the Russian. “You see, I was right!”

“My dear Boris, can you not take a joke?”

“Was it a joke?”

“Of course.”

“Then all I can say is that your ideas of humour are peculiar, my dear
Rita.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer smiled.

“Let us not quarrel, Boris. Touch the bell. We will have some drinks.”

Tuppence beat a hasty retreat. She paused a moment to survey herself in
Mrs. Vandemeyer’s long glass, and be sure that nothing was amiss with
her appearance. Then she answered the bell demurely.

The conversation that she had overheard, although interesting in that
it proved beyond doubt the complicity of both Rita and Boris, threw very
little light on the present preoccupations. The name of Jane Finn had
not even been mentioned.

The following morning a few brief words with Albert informed her that
nothing was waiting for her at the stationer’s. It seemed incredible
that Tommy, if all was well with him, should not send any word to her.
A cold hand seemed to close round her heart.... Supposing.... She choked
her fears down bravely. It was no good worrying. But she leapt at a
chance offered her by Mrs. Vandemeyer.

“What day do you usually go out, Prudence?”

“Friday’s my usual day, ma’am.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer lifted her eyebrows.

“And to-day is Friday! But I suppose you hardly wish to go out to-day,
as you only came yesterday.”

“I was thinking of asking you if I might, ma’am.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer looked at her a minute longer, and then smiled.

“I wish Count Stepanov could hear you. He made a suggestion about
you last night.” Her smile broadened, catlike. “Your request is
very--typical. I am satisfied. You do not understand all this--but
you can go out to-day. It makes no difference to me, as I shall not be
dining at home.”

“Thank you, ma’am.”

Tuppence felt a sensation of relief once she was out of the other’s
presence. Once again she admitted to herself that she was afraid,
horribly afraid, of the beautiful woman with the cruel eyes.

In the midst of a final desultory polishing of her silver, Tuppence was
disturbed by the ringing of the front door bell, and went to answer it.
This time the visitor was neither Whittington nor Boris, but a man of
striking appearance.

Just a shade over average height, he nevertheless conveyed the
impression of a big man. His face, clean-shaven and exquisitely mobile,
was stamped with an expression of power and force far beyond the
ordinary. Magnetism seemed to radiate from him.

Tuppence was undecided for the moment whether to put him down as an
actor or a lawyer, but her doubts were soon solved as he gave her his
name: Sir James Peel Edgerton.

She looked at him with renewed interest. This, then, was the famous K.C.
whose name was familiar all over England. She had heard it said that he
might one day be Prime Minister. He was known to have refused office in
the interests of his profession, preferring to remain a simple Member
for a Scotch constituency.

Tuppence went back to her pantry thoughtfully. The great man had
impressed her. She understood Boris’s agitation. Peel Edgerton would not
be an easy man to deceive.

In about a quarter of an hour the bell rang, and Tuppence repaired to
the hall to show the visitor out. He had given her a piercing glance
before. Now, as she handed him his hat and stick, she was conscious of
his eyes raking her through. As she opened the door and stood aside to
let him pass out, he stopped in the doorway.

“Not been doing this long, eh?”

Tuppence raised her eyes, astonished. She read in his glance kindliness,
and something else more difficult to fathom.

He nodded as though she had answered.

“V.A.D. and hard up, I suppose?”

“Did Mrs. Vandemeyer tell you that?” asked Tuppence suspiciously.

“No, child. The look of you told me. Good place here?”

“Very good, thank you, sir.”

“Ah, but there are plenty of good places nowadays. And a change does no
harm sometimes.”

“Do you mean----?” began Tuppence.

But Sir James was already on the topmost stair. He looked back with his
kindly, shrewd glance.

“Just a hint,” he said. “That’s all.”

Tuppence went back to the pantry more thoughtful than ever.



CHAPTER XI. JULIUS TELLS A STORY

DRESSED appropriately, Tuppence duly sallied forth for her “afternoon
out.” Albert was in temporary abeyance, but Tuppence went herself to the
stationer’s to make quite sure that nothing had come for her. Satisfied
on this point, she made her way to the _Ritz_. On inquiry she learnt
that Tommy had not yet returned. It was the answer she had expected, but
it was another nail in the coffin of her hopes. She resolved to appeal
to Mr. Carter, telling him when and where Tommy had started on his
quest, and asking him to do something to trace him. The prospect of
his aid revived her mercurial spirits, and she next inquired for Julius
Hersheimmer. The reply she got was to the effect that he had returned
about half an hour ago, but had gone out immediately.

Tuppence’s spirits revived still more. It would be something to see
Julius. Perhaps he could devise some plan for finding out what
had become of Tommy. She wrote her note to Mr. Carter in Julius’s
sitting-room, and was just addressing the envelope when the door burst
open.

“What the hell----” began Julius, but checked himself abruptly. “I beg
your pardon, Miss Tuppence. Those fools down at the office would have it
that Beresford wasn’t here any longer--hadn’t been here since Wednesday.
Is that so?”

Tuppence nodded.

“You don’t know where he is?” she asked faintly.

“I? How should I know? I haven’t had one darned word from him, though I
wired him yesterday morning.”

“I expect your wire’s at the office unopened.”

“But where is he?”

“I don’t know. I hoped you might.”

“I tell you I haven’t had one darned word from him since we parted at
the depot on Wednesday.”

“What depot?”

“Waterloo. Your London and South Western road.”

“Waterloo?” frowned Tuppence.

“Why, yes. Didn’t he tell you?”

“I haven’t seen him either,” replied Tuppence impatiently. “Go on about
Waterloo. What were you doing there?”

“He gave me a call. Over the phone. Told me to get a move on, and
hustle. Said he was trailing two crooks.”

“Oh!” said Tuppence, her eyes opening. “I see. Go on.”

“I hurried along right away. Beresford was there. He pointed out the
crooks. The big one was mine, the guy you bluffed. Tommy shoved a ticket
into my hand and told me to get aboard the cars. He was going to sleuth
the other crook.” Julius paused. “I thought for sure you’d know all
this.”

“Julius,” said Tuppence firmly, “stop walking up and down. It makes me
giddy. Sit down in that armchair, and tell me the whole story with as
few fancy turns of speech as possible.”

Mr. Hersheimmer obeyed.

“Sure,” he said. “Where shall I begin?”

“Where you left off. At Waterloo.”

“Well,” began Julius, “I got into one of your dear old-fashioned
first-class British compartments. The train was just off. First thing I
knew a guard came along and informed me mighty politely that I wasn’t
in a smoking-carriage. I handed him out half a dollar, and that settled
that. I did a bit of prospecting along the corridor to the next coach.
Whittington was there right enough. When I saw the skunk, with his big
sleek fat face, and thought of poor little Jane in his clutches, I felt
real mad that I hadn’t got a gun with me. I’d have tickled him up some.

“We got to Bournemouth all right. Whittington took a cab and gave the
name of an hotel. I did likewise, and we drove up within three minutes
of each other. He hired a room, and I hired one too. So far it was all
plain sailing. He hadn’t the remotest notion that anyone was on to him.
Well, he just sat around in the hotel lounge, reading the papers and so
on, till it was time for dinner. He didn’t hurry any over that either.

“I began to think that there was nothing doing, that he’d just come on
the trip for his health, but I remembered that he hadn’t changed for
dinner, though it was by way of being a slap-up hotel, so it seemed
likely enough that he’d be going out on his real business afterwards.

“Sure enough, about nine o’clock, so he did. Took a car across the
town--mighty pretty place by the way, I guess I’ll take Jane there for
a spell when I find her--and then paid it off and struck out along those
pine-woods on the top of the cliff. I was there too, you understand.
We walked, maybe, for half an hour. There’s a lot of villas all the way
along, but by degrees they seemed to get more and more thinned out, and
in the end we got to one that seemed the last of the bunch. Big house it
was, with a lot of piny grounds around it.

“It was a pretty black night, and the carriage drive up to the house was
dark as pitch. I could hear him ahead, though I couldn’t see him. I
had to walk carefully in case he might get on to it that he was being
followed. I turned a curve and I was just in time to see him ring the
bell and get admitted to the house. I just stopped where I was. It was
beginning to rain, and I was soon pretty near soaked through. Also, it
was almighty cold.

“Whittington didn’t come out again, and by and by I got kind of restive,
and began to mouch around. All the ground floor windows were shuttered
tight, but upstairs, on the first floor (it was a two-storied house) I
noticed a window with a light burning and the curtains not drawn.

“Now, just opposite to that window, there was a tree growing. It was
about thirty foot away from the house, maybe, and I sort of got it into
my head that, if I climbed up that tree, I’d very likely be able to see
into that room. Of course, I knew there was no reason why Whittington
should be in that room rather than in any other--less reason, in fact,
for the betting would be on his being in one of the reception-rooms
downstairs. But I guess I’d got the hump from standing so long in the
rain, and anything seemed better than going on doing nothing. So I
started up.

“It wasn’t so easy, by a long chalk! The rain had made the boughs mighty
slippery, and it was all I could do to keep a foothold, but bit by bit I
managed it, until at last there I was level with the window.

“But then I was disappointed. I was too far to the left. I could only
see sideways into the room. A bit of curtain, and a yard of wallpaper
was all I could command. Well, that wasn’t any manner of good to me, but
just as I was going to give it up, and climb down ignominiously, some
one inside moved and threw his shadow on my little bit of wall--and, by
gum, it was Whittington!

“After that, my blood was up. I’d just _got_ to get a look into that
room. It was up to me to figure out how. I noticed that there was a long
branch running out from the tree in the right direction. If I could only
swarm about half-way along it, the proposition would be solved. But it
was mighty uncertain whether it would bear my weight. I decided I’d
just got to risk that, and I started. Very cautiously, inch by inch, I
crawled along. The bough creaked and swayed in a nasty fashion, and it
didn’t do to think of the drop below, but at last I got safely to where
I wanted to be.

“The room was medium-sized, furnished in a kind of bare hygienic way.
There was a table with a lamp on it in the middle of the room, and
sitting at that table, facing towards me, was Whittington right enough.
He was talking to a woman dressed as a hospital nurse. She was sitting
with her back to me, so I couldn’t see her face. Although the blinds
were up, the window itself was shut, so I couldn’t catch a word of what
they said. Whittington seemed to be doing all the talking, and the nurse
just listened. Now and then she nodded, and sometimes she’d shake
her head, as though she were answering questions. He seemed very
emphatic--once or twice he beat with his fist on the table. The rain had
stopped now, and the sky was clearing in that sudden way it does.

“Presently, he seemed to get to the end of what he was saying. He got
up, and so did she. He looked towards the window and asked something--I
guess it was whether it was raining. Anyway, she came right across and
looked out. Just then the moon came out from behind the clouds. I
was scared the woman would catch sight of me, for I was full in the
moonlight. I tried to move back a bit. The jerk I gave was too much for
that rotten old branch. With an almighty crash, down it came, and Julius
P. Hersheimmer with it!”

“Oh, Julius,” breathed Tuppence, “how exciting! Go on.”

“Well, luckily for me, I pitched down into a good soft bed of earth--but
it put me out of action for the time, sure enough. The next thing I
knew, I was lying in bed with a hospital nurse (not Whittington’s one)
on one side of me, and a little black-bearded man with gold glasses,
and medical man written all over him, on the other. He rubbed his hands
together, and raised his eyebrows as I stared at him. ‘Ah!’ he said. ‘So
our young friend is coming round again. Capital. Capital.’

“I did the usual stunt. Said: ‘What’s happened?’ And ‘Where am I?’ But
I knew the answer to the last well enough. There’s no moss growing on
my brain. ‘I think that’ll do for the present, sister,’ said the little
man, and the nurse left the room in a sort of brisk well-trained way.
But I caught her handing me out a look of deep curiosity as she passed
through the door.

“That look of hers gave me an idea. ‘Now then, doc,’ I said, and tried
to sit up in bed, but my right foot gave me a nasty twinge as I did so.
‘A slight sprain,’ explained the doctor. ‘Nothing serious. You’ll be
about again in a couple of days.’”

“I noticed you walked lame,” interpolated Tuppence.

Julius nodded, and continued:

“‘How did it happen?’ I asked again. He replied dryly. ‘You fell, with
a considerable portion of one of my trees, into one of my newly planted
flower-beds.’

“I liked the man. He seemed to have a sense of humour. I felt sure that
he, at least, was plumb straight. ‘Sure, doc,’ I said, ‘I’m sorry about
the tree, and I guess the new bulbs will be on me. But perhaps you’d
like to know what I was doing in your garden?’ ‘I think the facts do
call for an explanation,’ he replied. ‘Well, to begin with, I wasn’t
after the spoons.’

“He smiled. ‘My first theory. But I soon altered my mind. By the way,
you are an American, are you not?’ I told him my name. ‘And you?’ ‘I am
Dr. Hall, and this, as you doubtless know, is my private nursing home.’

“I didn’t know, but I wasn’t going to put him wise. I was just thankful
for the information. I liked the man, and I felt he was straight, but
I wasn’t going to give him the whole story. For one thing he probably
wouldn’t have believed it.

“I made up my mind in a flash. ‘Why, doctor,’ I said, ‘I guess I feel
an almighty fool, but I owe it to you to let you know that it wasn’t
the Bill Sikes business I was up to.’ Then I went on and mumbled out
something about a girl. I trotted out the stern guardian business, and a
nervous breakdown, and finally explained that I had fancied I recognized
her among the patients at the home, hence my nocturnal adventures. I
guess it was just the kind of story he was expecting. ‘Quite a romance,’
he said genially, when I’d finished. ‘Now, doc,’ I went on, ‘will you
be frank with me? Have you here now, or have you had here at any time,
a young girl called Jane Finn?’ He repeated the name thoughtfully. ‘Jane
Finn?’ he said. ‘No.’

“I was chagrined, and I guess I showed it. ‘You are sure?’ ‘Quite sure,
Mr. Hersheimmer. It is an uncommon name, and I should not have been
likely to forget it.’

“Well, that was flat. It laid me out for a space. I’d kind of hoped
my search was at an end. ‘That’s that,’ I said at last. ‘Now, there’s
another matter. When I was hugging that darned branch I thought I
recognized an old friend of mine talking to one of your nurses.’ I
purposely didn’t mention any name because, of course, Whittington might
be calling himself something quite different down here, but the doctor
answered at once. ‘Mr. Whittington, perhaps?’ ‘That’s the fellow,’ I
replied. ‘What’s he doing down here? Don’t tell me _his_ nerves are out
of order?’

“Dr. Hall laughed. ‘No. He came down to see one of my nurses, Nurse
Edith, who is a niece of his.’ ‘Why, fancy that!’ I exclaimed. ‘Is he
still here?’ ‘No, he went back to town almost immediately.’ ‘What a
pity!’ I ejaculated. ‘But perhaps I could speak to his niece--Nurse
Edith, did you say her name was?’

“But the doctor shook his head. ‘I’m afraid that, too, is impossible.
Nurse Edith left with a patient to-night also.’ ‘I seem to be real
unlucky,’ I remarked. ‘Have you Mr. Whittington’s address in town?
I guess I’d like to look him up when I get back.’ ‘I don’t know his
address. I can write to Nurse Edith for it if you like.’ I thanked him.
‘Don’t say who it is wants it. I’d like to give him a little surprise.’

“That was about all I could do for the moment. Of course, if the girl
was really Whittington’s niece, she might be too cute to fall into the
trap, but it was worth trying. Next thing I did was to write out a wire
to Beresford saying where I was, and that I was laid up with a sprained
foot, and telling him to come down if he wasn’t busy. I had to be
guarded in what I said. However, I didn’t hear from him, and my foot
soon got all right. It was only ricked, not really sprained, so to-day I
said good-bye to the little doctor chap, asked him to send me word if
he heard from Nurse Edith, and came right away back to town. Say, Miss
Tuppence, you’re looking mighty pale!”

“It’s Tommy,” said Tuppence. “What can have happened to him?”

“Buck up, I guess he’s all right really. Why shouldn’t he be? See here,
it was a foreign-looking guy he went off after. Maybe they’ve gone
abroad--to Poland, or something like that?”

Tuppence shook her head.

“He couldn’t without passports and things. Besides I’ve seen that man,
Boris Something, since. He dined with Mrs. Vandemeyer last night.”

“Mrs. Who?”

“I forgot. Of course you don’t know all that.”

“I’m listening,” said Julius, and gave vent to his favourite expression.
“Put me wise.”

Tuppence thereupon related the events of the last two days. Julius’s
astonishment and admiration were unbounded.

“Bully for you! Fancy you a menial. It just tickles me to death!” Then
he added seriously: “But say now, I don’t like it, Miss Tuppence, I sure
don’t. You’re just as plucky as they make ‘em, but I wish you’d keep
right out of this. These crooks we’re up against would as soon croak a
girl as a man any day.”

“Do you think I’m afraid?” said Tuppence indignantly, valiantly
repressing memories of the steely glitter in Mrs. Vandemeyer’s eyes.

“I said before you were darned plucky. But that doesn’t alter facts.”

“Oh, bother _me!_” said Tuppence impatiently. “Let’s think about what
can have happened to Tommy. I’ve written to Mr. Carter about it,” she
added, and told him the gist of her letter.

Julius nodded gravely.

“I guess that’s good as far as it goes. But it’s for us to get busy and
do something.”

“What can we do?” asked Tuppence, her spirits rising.

“I guess we’d better get on the track of Boris. You say he’s been to
your place. Is he likely to come again?”

“He might. I really don’t know.”

“I see. Well, I guess I’d better buy a car, a slap-up one, dress as a
chauffeur and hang about outside. Then if Boris comes, you could make
some kind of signal, and I’d trail him. How’s that?”

“Splendid, but he mightn’t come for weeks.”

“We’ll have to chance that. I’m glad you like the plan.” He rose.

“Where are you going?”

“To buy the car, of course,” replied Julius, surprised. “What make do
you like? I guess you’ll do some riding in it before we’ve finished.”

“Oh,” said Tuppence faintly, “I _like_ Rolls-Royces, but----”

“Sure,” agreed Julius. “What you say goes. I’ll get one.”

“But you can’t at once,” cried Tuppence. “People wait ages sometimes.”

“Little Julius doesn’t,” affirmed Mr. Hersheimmer. “Don’t you worry any.
I’ll be round in the car in half an hour.”

Tuppence got up.

“You’re awfully good, Julius. But I can’t help feeling that it’s rather
a forlorn hope. I’m really pinning my faith to Mr. Carter.”

“Then I shouldn’t.”

“Why?”

“Just an idea of mine.”

“Oh; but he must do something. There’s no one else. By the way, I forgot
to tell you of a queer thing that happened this morning.”

And she narrated her encounter with Sir James Peel Edgerton. Julius was
interested.

“What did the guy mean, do you think?” he asked.

“I don’t quite know,” said Tuppence meditatively. “But I think that, in
an ambiguous, legal, without prejudishish lawyer’s way, he was trying to
warn me.”

“Why should he?”

“I don’t know,” confessed Tuppence. “But he looked kind, and
simply awfully clever. I wouldn’t mind going to him and telling him
everything.”

Somewhat to her surprise, Julius negatived the idea sharply.

“See here,” he said, “we don’t want any lawyers mixed up in this. That
guy couldn’t help us any.”

“Well, I believe he could,” reiterated Tuppence obstinately.

“Don’t you think it. So long. I’ll be back in half an hour.”

Thirty-five minutes had elapsed when Julius returned. He took Tuppence
by the arm, and walked her to the window.

“There she is.”

“Oh!” said Tuppence with a note of reverence in her voice, as she gazed
down at the enormous car.

“She’s some pace-maker, I can tell you,” said Julius complacently.

“How did you get it?” gasped Tuppence.

“She was just being sent home to some bigwig.”

“Well?”

“I went round to his house,” said Julius. “I said that I reckoned a car
like that was worth every penny of twenty thousand dollars. Then I told
him that it was worth just about fifty thousand dollars to me if he’d
get out.”

“Well?” said Tuppence, intoxicated.

“Well,” returned Julius, “he got out, that’s all.”



CHAPTER XII. A FRIEND IN NEED

FRIDAY and Saturday passed uneventfully. Tuppence had received a brief
answer to her appeal from Mr. Carter. In it he pointed out that the
Young Adventurers had undertaken the work at their own risk, and had
been fully warned of the dangers. If anything had happened to Tommy he
regretted it deeply, but he could do nothing.

This was cold comfort. Somehow, without Tommy, all the savour went out
of the adventure, and, for the first time, Tuppence felt doubtful of
success. While they had been together she had never questioned it for
a minute. Although she was accustomed to take the lead, and to pride
herself on her quick-wittedness, in reality she had relied upon Tommy
more than she realized at the time. There was something so eminently
sober and clear-headed about him, his common sense and soundness of
vision were so unvarying, that without him Tuppence felt much like a
rudderless ship. It was curious that Julius, who was undoubtedly much
cleverer than Tommy, did not give her the same feeling of support. She
had accused Tommy of being a pessimist, and it is certain that he
always saw the disadvantages and difficulties which she herself was
optimistically given to overlooking, but nevertheless she had really
relied a good deal on his judgment. He might be slow, but he was very
sure.

It seemed to the girl that, for the first time, she realized the
sinister character of the mission they had undertaken so lightheartedly.
It had begun like a page of romance. Now, shorn of its glamour, it
seemed to be turning to grim reality. Tommy--that was all that mattered.
Many times in the day Tuppence blinked the tears out of her eyes
resolutely. “Little fool,” she would apostrophize herself, “don’t
snivel. Of course you’re fond of him. You’ve known him all your life.
But there’s no need to be sentimental about it.”

In the meantime, nothing more was seen of Boris. He did not come to the
flat, and Julius and the car waited in vain. Tuppence gave herself over
to new meditations. Whilst admitting the truth of Julius’s objections,
she had nevertheless not entirely relinquished the idea of appealing to
Sir James Peel Edgerton. Indeed, she had gone so far as to look up his
address in the _Red Book_. Had he meant to warn her that day? If so,
why? Surely she was at least entitled to demand an explanation. He had
looked at her so kindly. Perhaps he might tell them something concerning
Mrs. Vandemeyer which might lead to a clue to Tommy’s whereabouts.

Anyway, Tuppence decided, with her usual shake of the shoulders, it was
worth trying, and try it she would. Sunday was her afternoon out. She
would meet Julius, persuade him to her point of view, and they would
beard the lion in his den.

When the day arrived Julius needed a considerable amount of persuading,
but Tuppence held firm. “It can do no harm,” was what she always came
back to. In the end Julius gave in, and they proceeded in the car to
Carlton House Terrace.

The door was opened by an irreproachable butler. Tuppence felt a little
nervous. After all, perhaps it _was_ colossal cheek on her part. She
had decided not to ask if Sir James was “at home,” but to adopt a more
personal attitude.

“Will you ask Sir James if I can see him for a few minutes? I have an
important message for him.”

The butler retired, returning a moment or two later.

“Sir James will see you. Will you step this way?”

He ushered them into a room at the back of the house, furnished as a
library. The collection of books was a magnificent one, and Tuppence
noticed that all one wall was devoted to works on crime and criminology.
There were several deep-padded leather arm-chairs, and an old-fashioned
open hearth. In the window was a big roll-top desk strewn with papers at
which the master of the house was sitting.

He rose as they entered.

“You have a message for me? Ah”--he recognized Tuppence with a
smile--“it’s you, is it? Brought a message from Mrs. Vandemeyer, I
suppose?”

“Not exactly,” said Tuppence. “In fact, I’m afraid I only said that to
be quite sure of getting in. Oh, by the way, this is Mr. Hersheimmer,
Sir James Peel Edgerton.”

“Pleased to meet you,” said the American, shooting out a hand.

“Won’t you both sit down?” asked Sir James. He drew forward two chairs.

“Sir James,” said Tuppence, plunging boldly, “I dare say you will think
it is most awful cheek of me coming here like this. Because, of course,
it’s nothing whatever to do with you, and then you’re a very important
person, and of course Tommy and I are very unimportant.” She paused for
breath.

“Tommy?” queried Sir James, looking across at the American.

“No, that’s Julius,” explained Tuppence. “I’m rather nervous, and that
makes me tell it badly. What I really want to know is what you meant by
what you said to me the other day? Did you mean to warn me against Mrs.
Vandemeyer? You did, didn’t you?”

“My dear young lady, as far as I recollect I only mentioned that there
were equally good situations to be obtained elsewhere.”

“Yes, I know. But it was a hint, wasn’t it?”

“Well, perhaps it was,” admitted Sir James gravely.

“Well, I want to know more. I want to know just _why_ you gave me a
hint.”

Sir James smiled at her earnestness.

“Suppose the lady brings a libel action against me for defamation of
character?”

“Of course,” said Tuppence. “I know lawyers are always dreadfully
careful. But can’t we say ‘without prejudice’ first, and then say just
what we want to.”

“Well,” said Sir James, still smiling, “without prejudice, then, if I
had a young sister forced to earn her living, I should not like to see
her in Mrs. Vandemeyer’s service. I felt it incumbent on me just to give
you a hint. It is no place for a young and inexperienced girl. That is
all I can tell you.”

“I see,” said Tuppence thoughtfully. “Thank you very much. But I’m not
_really_ inexperienced, you know. I knew perfectly that she was a bad
lot when I went there--as a matter of fact that’s _why_ I went----” She
broke off, seeing some bewilderment on the lawyer’s face, and went on:
“I think perhaps I’d better tell you the whole story, Sir James. I’ve a
sort of feeling that you’d know in a minute if I didn’t tell the truth,
and so you might as well know all about it from the beginning. What do
you think, Julius?”

“As you’re bent on it, I’d go right ahead with the facts,” replied the
American, who had so far sat in silence.

“Yes, tell me all about it,” said Sir James. “I want to know who Tommy
is.”

Thus encouraged Tuppence plunged into her tale, and the lawyer listened
with close attention.

“Very interesting,” he said, when she finished. “A great deal of what
you tell me, child, is already known to me. I’ve had certain theories
of my own about this Jane Finn. You’ve done extraordinarily well so
far, but it’s rather too bad of--what do you know him as?--Mr. Carter to
pitchfork you two young things into an affair of this kind. By the
way, where did Mr. Hersheimmer come in originally? You didn’t make that
clear?”

Julius answered for himself.

“I’m Jane’s first cousin,” he explained, returning the lawyer’s keen
gaze.

“Ah!”

“Oh, Sir James,” broke out Tuppence, “what do you think has become of
Tommy?”

“H’m.” The lawyer rose, and paced slowly up and down. “When you arrived,
young lady, I was just packing up my traps. Going to Scotland by the
night train for a few days’ fishing. But there are different kinds of
fishing. I’ve a good mind to stay, and see if we can’t get on the track
of that young chap.”

“Oh!” Tuppence clasped her hands ecstatically.

“All the same, as I said before, it’s too bad of--of Carter to set you
two babies on a job like this. Now, don’t get offended, Miss--er----”

“Cowley. Prudence Cowley. But my friends call me Tuppence.”

“Well, Miss Tuppence, then, as I’m certainly going to be a friend. Don’t
be offended because I think you’re young. Youth is a failing only too
easily outgrown. Now, about this young Tommy of yours----”

“Yes.” Tuppence clasped her hands.

“Frankly, things look bad for him. He’s been butting in somewhere where
he wasn’t wanted. Not a doubt of it. But don’t give up hope.”

“And you really will help us? There, Julius! He didn’t want me to come,”
 she added by way of explanation.

“H’m,” said the lawyer, favouring Julius with another keen glance. “And
why was that?”

“I reckoned it would be no good worrying you with a petty little
business like this.”

“I see.” He paused a moment. “This petty little business, as you call
it, bears directly on a very big business, bigger perhaps than either
you or Miss Tuppence know. If this boy is alive, he may have very
valuable information to give us. Therefore, we must find him.”

“Yes, but how?” cried Tuppence. “I’ve tried to think of everything.”

Sir James smiled.

“And yet there’s one person quite near at hand who in all probability
knows where he is, or at all events where he is likely to be.”

“Who is that?” asked Tuppence, puzzled.

“Mrs. Vandemeyer.”

“Yes, but she’d never tell us.”

“Ah, that is where I come in. I think it quite likely that I shall be
able to make Mrs. Vandemeyer tell me what I want to know.”

“How?” demanded Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide.

“Oh, just by asking her questions,” replied Sir James easily. “That’s
the way we do it, you know.”

He tapped with his finger on the table, and Tuppence felt again the
intense power that radiated from the man.

“And if she won’t tell?” asked Julius suddenly.

“I think she will. I have one or two powerful levers. Still, in that
unlikely event, there is always the possibility of bribery.”

“Sure. And that’s where I come in!” cried Julius, bringing his fist down
on the table with a bang. “You can count on me, if necessary, for one
million dollars. Yes, sir, one million dollars!”

Sir James sat down and subjected Julius to a long scrutiny.

“Mr. Hersheimmer,” he said at last, “that is a very large sum.”

“I guess it’ll have to be. These aren’t the kind of folk to offer
sixpence to.”

“At the present rate of exchange it amounts to considerably over two
hundred and fifty thousand pounds.”

“That’s so. Maybe you think I’m talking through my hat, but I can
deliver the goods all right, with enough over to spare for your fee.”

Sir James flushed slightly.

“There is no question of a fee, Mr. Hersheimmer. I am not a private
detective.”

“Sorry. I guess I was just a mite hasty, but I’ve been feeling bad about
this money question. I wanted to offer a big reward for news of Jane
some days ago, but your crusted institution of Scotland Yard advised me
against it. Said it was undesirable.”

“They were probably right,” said Sir James dryly.

“But it’s all O.K. about Julius,” put in Tuppence. “He’s not pulling
your leg. He’s got simply pots of money.”

“The old man piled it up in style,” explained Julius. “Now, let’s get
down to it. What’s your idea?”

Sir James considered for a moment or two.

“There is no time to be lost. The sooner we strike the better.” He
turned to Tuppence. “Is Mrs. Vandemeyer dining out to-night, do you
know?”

“Yes, I think so, but she will not be out late. Otherwise, she would
have taken the latchkey.”

“Good. I will call upon her about ten o’clock. What time are you
supposed to return?”

“About nine-thirty or ten, but I could go back earlier.”

“You must not do that on any account. It might arouse suspicion if you
did not stay out till the usual time. Be back by nine-thirty. I will
arrive at ten. Mr. Hersheimmer will wait below in a taxi perhaps.”

“He’s got a new Rolls-Royce car,” said Tuppence with vicarious pride.

“Even better. If I succeed in obtaining the address from her, we can
go there at once, taking Mrs. Vandemeyer with us if necessary. You
understand?”

“Yes.” Tuppence rose to her feet with a skip of delight. “Oh, I feel so
much better!”

“Don’t build on it too much, Miss Tuppence. Go easy.”

Julius turned to the lawyer.

“Say, then. I’ll call for you in the car round about nine-thirty. Is
that right?”

“Perhaps that will be the best plan. It would be unnecessary to have two
cars waiting about. Now, Miss Tuppence, my advice to you is to go and
have a good dinner, a _really_ good one, mind. And don’t think ahead
more than you can help.”

He shook hands with them both, and a moment later they were outside.

“Isn’t he a duck?” inquired Tuppence ecstatically, as she skipped down
the steps. “Oh, Julius, isn’t he just a duck?”

“Well, I allow he seems to be the goods all right. And I was wrong about
its being useless to go to him. Say, shall we go right away back to the
_Ritz?_”

“I must walk a bit, I think. I feel so excited. Drop me in the park,
will you? Unless you’d like to come too?”

“I want to get some petrol,” he explained. “And send off a cable or
two.”

“All right. I’ll meet you at the _Ritz_ at seven. We’ll have to dine
upstairs. I can’t show myself in these glad rags.”

“Sure. I’ll get Felix help me choose the menu. He’s some head waiter,
that. So long.”

Tuppence walked briskly along towards the Serpentine, first glancing at
her watch. It was nearly six o’clock. She remembered that she had had no
tea, but felt too excited to be conscious of hunger. She walked as
far as Kensington Gardens and then slowly retraced her steps, feeling
infinitely better for the fresh air and exercise. It was not so easy to
follow Sir James’s advice, and put the possible events of the evening
out of her head. As she drew nearer and nearer to Hyde Park corner, the
temptation to return to South Audley Mansions was almost irresistible.

At any rate, she decided, it would do no harm just to go and _look_
at the building. Perhaps, then, she could resign herself to waiting
patiently for ten o’clock.

South Audley Mansions looked exactly the same as usual. What Tuppence
had expected she hardly knew, but the sight of its red brick stolidity
slightly assuaged the growing and entirely unreasonable uneasiness
that possessed her. She was just turning away when she heard a piercing
whistle, and the faithful Albert came running from the building to join
her.

Tuppence frowned. It was no part of the programme to have attention
called to her presence in the neighbourhood, but Albert was purple with
suppressed excitement.

“I say, miss, she’s a-going!”

“Who’s going?” demanded Tuppence sharply.

“The crook. Ready Rita. Mrs. Vandemeyer. She’s a-packing up, and she’s
just sent down word for me to get her a taxi.”

“What?” Tuppence clutched his arm.

“It’s the truth, miss. I thought maybe as you didn’t know about it.”

“Albert,” cried Tuppence, “you’re a brick. If it hadn’t been for you
we’d have lost her.”

Albert flushed with pleasure at this tribute.

“There’s no time to lose,” said Tuppence, crossing the road. “I’ve got
to stop her. At all costs I must keep her here until----” She broke off.
“Albert, there’s a telephone here, isn’t there?”

The boy shook his head.

“The flats mostly have their own, miss. But there’s a box just round the
corner.”

“Go to it then, at once, and ring up the _Ritz Hotel_. Ask for Mr.
Hersheimmer, and when you get him tell him to get Sir James and come on
at once, as Mrs. Vandemeyer is trying to hook it. If you can’t get him,
ring up Sir James Peel Edgerton, you’ll find his number in the book, and
tell him what’s happening. You won’t forget the names, will you?”

Albert repeated them glibly. “You trust to me, miss, it’ll be all right.
But what about you? Aren’t you afraid to trust yourself with her?”

“No, no, that’s all right. _But go and telephone_. Be quick.”

Drawing a long breath, Tuppence entered the Mansions and ran up to the
door of No. 20. How she was to detain Mrs. Vandemeyer until the two men
arrived, she did not know, but somehow or other it had to be done, and
she must accomplish the task single-handed. What had occasioned this
precipitate departure? Did Mrs. Vandemeyer suspect her?

Speculations were idle. Tuppence pressed the bell firmly. She might
learn something from the cook.

Nothing happened and, after waiting some minutes, Tuppence pressed the
bell again, keeping her finger on the button for some little while.
At last she heard footsteps inside, and a moment later Mrs. Vandemeyer
herself opened the door. She lifted her eyebrows at the sight of the
girl.

“You?”

“I had a touch of toothache, ma’am,” said Tuppence glibly. “So thought
it better to come home and have a quiet evening.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer said nothing, but she drew back and let Tuppence pass
into the hall.

“How unfortunate for you,” she said coldly. “You had better go to bed.”

“Oh, I shall be all right in the kitchen, ma’am. Cook will----”

“Cook is out,” said Mrs. Vandemeyer, in a rather disagreeable tone. “I
sent her out. So you see you had better go to bed.”

Suddenly Tuppence felt afraid. There was a ring in Mrs. Vandemeyer’s
voice that she did not like at all. Also, the other woman was slowly
edging her up the passage. Tuppence turned at bay.

“I don’t want----”

Then, in a flash, a rim of cold steel touched her temple, and Mrs.
Vandemeyer’s voice rose cold and menacing:

“You damned little fool! Do you think I don’t know? No, don’t answer. If
you struggle or cry out, I’ll shoot you like a dog.”

The rim of steel pressed a little harder against the girl’s temple.

“Now then, march,” went on Mrs. Vandemeyer. “This way--into my room. In
a minute, when I’ve done with you, you’ll go to bed as I told you to.
And you’ll sleep--oh yes, my little spy, you’ll sleep all right!”

There was a sort of hideous geniality in the last words which Tuppence
did not at all like. For the moment there was nothing to be done, and
she walked obediently into Mrs. Vandemeyer’s bedroom. The pistol never
left her forehead. The room was in a state of wild disorder, clothes
were flung about right and left, a suit-case and a hat box, half-packed,
stood in the middle of the floor.

Tuppence pulled herself together with an effort. Her voice shook a
little, but she spoke out bravely.

“Come now,” she said. “This is nonsense. You can’t shoot me. Why, every
one in the building would hear the report.”

“I’d risk that,” said Mrs. Vandemeyer cheerfully. “But, as long as you
don’t sing out for help, you’re all right--and I don’t think you will.
You’re a clever girl. You deceived _me_ all right. I hadn’t a suspicion
of you! So I’ve no doubt that you understand perfectly well that this
is where I’m on top and you’re underneath. Now then--sit on the bed. Put
your hands above your head, and if you value your life don’t move them.”

Tuppence obeyed passively. Her good sense told her that there was
nothing else to do but accept the situation. If she shrieked for help
there was very little chance of anyone hearing her, whereas there was
probably quite a good chance of Mrs. Vandemeyer’s shooting her. In the
meantime, every minute of delay gained was valuable.

Mrs. Vandemeyer laid down the revolver on the edge of the washstand
within reach of her hand, and, still eyeing Tuppence like a lynx in case
the girl should attempt to move, she took a little stoppered bottle from
its place on the marble and poured some of its contents into a glass
which she filled up with water.

“What’s that?” asked Tuppence sharply.

“Something to make you sleep soundly.”

Tuppence paled a little.

“Are you going to poison me?” she asked in a whisper.

“Perhaps,” said Mrs. Vandemeyer, smiling agreeably.

“Then I shan’t drink it,” said Tuppence firmly. “I’d much rather be
shot. At any rate that would make a row, and some one might hear it. But
I won’t be killed off quietly like a lamb.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer stamped her foot.

“Don’t be a little fool! Do you really think I want a hue and cry for
murder out after me? If you’ve any sense at all, you’ll realize that
poisoning you wouldn’t suit my book at all. It’s a sleeping draught,
that’s all. You’ll wake up to-morrow morning none the worse. I simply
don’t want the bother of tying you up and gagging you. That’s the
alternative--and you won’t like it, I can tell you! I can be very rough
if I choose. So drink this down like a good girl, and you’ll be none the
worse for it.”

In her heart of hearts Tuppence believed her. The arguments she had
adduced rang true. It was a simple and effective method of getting her
out of the way for the time being. Nevertheless, the girl did not take
kindly to the idea of being tamely put to sleep without as much as one
bid for freedom. She felt that once Mrs. Vandemeyer gave them the slip,
the last hope of finding Tommy would be gone.

Tuppence was quick in her mental processes. All these reflections
passed through her mind in a flash, and she saw where a chance, a very
problematical chance, lay, and she determined to risk all in one supreme
effort.

Accordingly, she lurched suddenly off the bed and fell on her knees
before Mrs. Vandemeyer, clutching her skirts frantically.

“I don’t believe it,” she moaned. “It’s poison--I know it’s poison.
Oh, don’t make me drink it”--her voice rose to a shriek--“don’t make me
drink it!”

Mrs. Vandemeyer, glass in hand, looked down with a curling lip at this
sudden collapse.

“Get up, you little idiot! Don’t go on drivelling there. How you ever
had the nerve to play your part as you did I can’t think.” She stamped
her foot. “Get up, I say.”

But Tuppence continued to cling and sob, interjecting her sobs with
incoherent appeals for mercy. Every minute gained was to the good.
Moreover, as she grovelled, she moved imperceptibly nearer to her
objective.

Mrs. Vandemeyer gave a sharp impatient exclamation, and jerked the girl
to her knees.

“Drink it at once!” Imperiously she pressed the glass to the girl’s
lips.

Tuppence gave one last despairing moan.

“You swear it won’t hurt me?” she temporized.

“Of course it won’t hurt you. Don’t be a fool.”

“Will you swear it?”

“Yes, yes,” said the other impatiently. “I swear it.”

Tuppence raised a trembling left hand to the glass.

“Very well.” Her mouth opened meekly.

Mrs. Vandemeyer gave a sigh of relief, off her guard for the moment.
Then, quick as a flash, Tuppence jerked the glass upward as hard as she
could. The fluid in it splashed into Mrs. Vandemeyer’s face, and during
her momentary gasp, Tuppence’s right hand shot out and grasped the
revolver where it lay on the edge of the washstand. The next moment
she had sprung back a pace, and the revolver pointed straight at Mrs.
Vandemeyer’s heart, with no unsteadiness in the hand that held it.

In the moment of victory, Tuppence betrayed a somewhat unsportsmanlike
triumph.

“Now who’s on top and who’s underneath?” she crowed.

The other’s face was convulsed with rage. For a minute Tuppence thought
she was going to spring upon her, which would have placed the girl in an
unpleasant dilemma, since she meant to draw the line at actually letting
off the revolver. However, with an effort Mrs. Vandemeyer controlled
herself, and at last a slow evil smile crept over her face.

“Not a fool, then, after all! You did that well, girl. But you shall pay
for it--oh, yes, you shall pay for it! I have a long memory!”

“I’m surprised you should have been gulled so easily,” said Tuppence
scornfully. “Did you really think I was the kind of girl to roll about
on the floor and whine for mercy?”

“You may do--some day!” said the other significantly.

The cold malignity of her manner sent an unpleasant chill down
Tuppence’s spine, but she was not going to give in to it.

“Supposing we sit down,” she said pleasantly. “Our present attitude is
a little melodramatic. No--not on the bed. Draw a chair up to the table,
that’s right. Now I’ll sit opposite you with the revolver in front of
me--just in case of accidents. Splendid. Now, let’s talk.”

“What about?” said Mrs. Vandemeyer sullenly.

Tuppence eyed her thoughtfully for a minute. She was remembering several
things. Boris’s words, “I believe you would sell-- _us!_” and her
answer, “The price would have to be enormous,” given lightly, it was
true, yet might not there be a substratum of truth in it? Long ago,
had not Whittington asked: “Who’s been blabbing? Rita?” Would Rita
Vandemeyer prove to be the weak spot in the armour of Mr. Brown?

Keeping her eyes fixed steadily on the other’s face, Tuppence replied
quietly:

“Money----”

Mrs. Vandemeyer started. Clearly, the reply was unexpected.

“What do you mean?”

“I’ll tell you. You said just now that you had a long memory. A long
memory isn’t half as useful as a long purse! I dare say it relieves your
feelings a good deal to plan out all sorts of dreadful things to do to
me, but is that _practical?_ Revenge is very unsatisfactory. Every one
always says so. But money”--Tuppence warmed to her pet creed--“well,
there’s nothing unsatisfactory about money, is there?”

“Do you think,” said Mrs. Vandemeyer scornfully, “that I am the kind of
woman to sell my friends?”

“Yes,” said Tuppence promptly. “If the price was big enough.”

“A paltry hundred pounds or so!”

“No,” said Tuppence. “I should suggest--a hundred thousand!”

Her economical spirit did not permit her to mention the whole million
dollars suggested by Julius.

A flush crept over Mrs. Vandemeyer’s face.

“What did you say?” she asked, her fingers playing nervously with a
brooch on her breast. In that moment Tuppence knew that the fish was
hooked, and for the first time she felt a horror of her own money-loving
spirit. It gave her a dreadful sense of kinship to the woman fronting
her.

“A hundred thousand pounds,” repeated Tuppence.

The light died out of Mrs. Vandemeyer’s eyes. She leaned back in her
chair.

“Bah!” she said. “You haven’t got it.”

“No,” admitted Tuppence, “I haven’t--but I know some one who has.”

“Who?”

“A friend of mine.”

“Must be a millionaire,” remarked Mrs. Vandemeyer unbelievingly.

“As a matter of fact he is. He’s an American. He’ll pay you that
without a murmur. You can take it from me that it’s a perfectly genuine
proposition.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer sat up again.

“I’m inclined to believe you,” she said slowly.

There was silence between them for some time, then Mrs. Vandemeyer
looked up.

“What does he want to know, this friend of yours?”

Tuppence went through a momentary struggle, but it was Julius’s money,
and his interests must come first.

“He wants to know where Jane Finn is,” she said boldly.

Mrs. Vandemeyer showed no surprise.

“I’m not sure where she is at the present moment,” she replied.

“But you could find out?”

“Oh, yes,” returned Mrs. Vandemeyer carelessly. “There would be no
difficulty about that.”

“Then”--Tuppence’s voice shook a little--“there’s a boy, a friend of
mine. I’m afraid something’s happened to him, through your pal Boris.”

“What’s his name?”

“Tommy Beresford.”

“Never heard of him. But I’ll ask Boris. He’ll tell me anything he
knows.”

“Thank you.” Tuppence felt a terrific rise in her spirits. It impelled
her to more audacious efforts. “There’s one thing more.”

“Well?”

Tuppence leaned forward and lowered her voice.

_“Who is Mr. Brown?”_

Her quick eyes saw the sudden paling of the beautiful face. With an
effort Mrs. Vandemeyer pulled herself together and tried to resume her
former manner. But the attempt was a mere parody.

She shrugged her shoulders.

“You can’t have learnt much about us if you don’t know that _nobody
knows who Mr. Brown is_....”

“You do,” said Tuppence quietly.

Again the colour deserted the other’s face.

“What makes you think that?”

“I don’t know,” said the girl truthfully. “But I’m sure.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer stared in front of her for a long time.

“Yes,” she said hoarsely, at last, “_I_ know. I was beautiful, you
see--very beautiful----”

“You are still,” said Tuppence with admiration.

Mrs. Vandemeyer shook her head. There was a strange gleam in her
electric-blue eyes.

“Not beautiful enough,” she said in a soft dangerous voice.
“Not--beautiful--enough! And sometimes, lately, I’ve been afraid....
It’s dangerous to know too much!” She leaned forward across the table.
“Swear that my name shan’t be brought into it--that no one shall ever
know.”

“I swear it. And, once’s he caught, you’ll be out of danger.”

A terrified look swept across Mrs. Vandemeyer’s face.

“Shall I? Shall I ever be?” She clutched Tuppence’s arm. “You’re sure
about the money?”

“Quite sure.”

“When shall I have it? There must be no delay.”

“This friend of mine will be here presently. He may have to send cables,
or something like that. But there won’t be any delay--he’s a terrific
hustler.”

A resolute look settled on Mrs. Vandemeyer’s face.

“I’ll do it. It’s a great sum of money, and besides”--she gave a curious
smile--“it is not--wise to throw over a woman like me!”

For a moment or two, she remained smiling, and lightly tapping her
fingers on the table. Suddenly she started, and her face blanched.

“What was that?”

“I heard nothing.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer gazed round her fearfully.

“If there should be some one listening----”

“Nonsense. Who could there be?”

“Even the walls might have ears,” whispered the other. “I tell you I’m
frightened. You don’t know him!”

“Think of the hundred thousand pounds,” said Tuppence soothingly.

Mrs. Vandemeyer passed her tongue over her dried lips.

“You don’t know him,” she reiterated hoarsely. “He’s--ah!”

With a shriek of terror she sprang to her feet. Her outstretched hand
pointed over Tuppence’s head. Then she swayed to the ground in a dead
faint.

Tuppence looked round to see what had startled her.

In the doorway were Sir James Peel Edgerton and Julius Hersheimmer.



CHAPTER XIII. THE VIGIL

SIR James brushed past Julius and hurriedly bent over the fallen woman.

“Heart,” he said sharply. “Seeing us so suddenly must have given her a
shock. Brandy--and quickly, or she’ll slip through our fingers.”

Julius hurried to the washstand.

“Not there,” said Tuppence over her shoulder. “In the tantalus in the
dining-room. Second door down the passage.”

Between them Sir James and Tuppence lifted Mrs. Vandemeyer and carried
her to the bed. There they dashed water on her face, but with no result.
The lawyer fingered her pulse.

“Touch and go,” he muttered. “I wish that young fellow would hurry up
with the brandy.”

At that moment Julius re-entered the room, carrying a glass half full of
the spirit which he handed to Sir James. While Tuppence lifted her head
the lawyer tried to force a little of the spirit between her closed
lips. Finally the woman opened her eyes feebly. Tuppence held the glass
to her lips.

“Drink this.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer complied. The brandy brought the colour back to her
white cheeks, and revived her in a marvellous fashion. She tried to sit
up--then fell back with a groan, her hand to her side.

“It’s my heart,” she whispered. “I mustn’t talk.”

She lay back with closed eyes.

Sir James kept his finger on her wrist a minute longer, then withdrew it
with a nod.

“She’ll do now.”

All three moved away, and stood together talking in low voices. One
and all were conscious of a certain feeling of anticlimax. Clearly any
scheme for cross-questioning the lady was out of the question for the
moment. For the time being they were baffled, and could do nothing.

Tuppence related how Mrs. Vandemeyer had declared herself willing
to disclose the identity of Mr. Brown, and how she had consented to
discover and reveal to them the whereabouts of Jane Finn. Julius was
congratulatory.

“That’s all right, Miss Tuppence. Splendid! I guess that hundred
thousand pounds will look just as good in the morning to the lady as it
did over night. There’s nothing to worry over. She won’t speak without
the cash anyway, you bet!”

There was certainly a good deal of common sense in this, and Tuppence
felt a little comforted.

“What you say is true,” said Sir James meditatively. “I must confess,
however, that I cannot help wishing we had not interrupted at the minute
we did. Still, it cannot be helped, it is only a matter of waiting until
the morning.”

He looked across at the inert figure on the bed. Mrs. Vandemeyer lay
perfectly passive with closed eyes. He shook his head.

“Well,” said Tuppence, with an attempt at cheerfulness, “we must wait
until the morning, that’s all. But I don’t think we ought to leave the
flat.”

“What about leaving that bright boy of yours on guard?”

“Albert? And suppose she came round again and hooked it. Albert couldn’t
stop her.”

“I guess she won’t want to make tracks away from the dollars.”

“She might. She seemed very frightened of ‘Mr. Brown.’”

“What? Real plumb scared of him?”

“Yes. She looked round and said even walls had ears.”

“Maybe she meant a dictaphone,” said Julius with interest.

“Miss Tuppence is right,” said Sir James quietly. “We must not leave the
flat--if only for Mrs. Vandemeyer’s sake.”

Julius stared at him.

“You think he’d get after her? Between now and to-morrow morning. How
could he know, even?”

“You forget your own suggestion of a dictaphone,” said Sir James dryly.
“We have a very formidable adversary. I believe, if we exercise all due
care, that there is a very good chance of his being delivered into our
hands. But we must neglect no precaution. We have an important witness,
but she must be safeguarded. I would suggest that Miss Tuppence should
go to bed, and that you and I, Mr. Hersheimmer, should share the vigil.”

Tuppence was about to protest, but happening to glance at the bed she
saw Mrs. Vandemeyer, her eyes half-open, with such an expression of
mingled fear and malevolence on her face that it quite froze the words
on her lips.

For a moment she wondered whether the faint and the heart attack had
been a gigantic sham, but remembering the deadly pallor she could hardly
credit the supposition. As she looked the expression disappeared as by
magic, and Mrs. Vandemeyer lay inert and motionless as before. For a
moment the girl fancied she must have dreamt it. But she determined
nevertheless to be on the alert.

“Well,” said Julius, “I guess we’d better make a move out of here any
way.”

The others fell in with his suggestion. Sir James again felt Mrs.
Vandemeyer’s pulse.

“Perfectly satisfactory,” he said in a low voice to Tuppence. “She’ll be
absolutely all right after a night’s rest.”

The girl hesitated a moment by the bed. The intensity of the expression
she had surprised had impressed her powerfully. Mrs. Vandemeyer lifted
her lids. She seemed to be struggling to speak. Tuppence bent over her.

“Don’t--leave----” she seemed unable to proceed, murmuring something
that sounded like “sleepy.” Then she tried again.

Tuppence bent lower still. It was only a breath.

“Mr.--Brown----” The voice stopped.

But the half-closed eyes seemed still to send an agonized message.

Moved by a sudden impulse, the girl said quickly:

“I shan’t leave the flat. I shall sit up all night.”

A flash of relief showed before the lids descended once more. Apparently
Mrs. Vandemeyer slept. But her words had awakened a new uneasiness in
Tuppence. What had she meant by that low murmur: “Mr. Brown?” Tuppence
caught herself nervously looking over her shoulder. The big wardrobe
loomed up in a sinister fashion before her eyes. Plenty of room for a
man to hide in that.... Half-ashamed of herself, Tuppence pulled it open
and looked inside. No one--of course! She stooped down and looked under
the bed. There was no other possible hiding-place.

Tuppence gave her familiar shake of the shoulders. It was absurd, this
giving way to nerves! Slowly she went out of the room. Julius and Sir
James were talking in a low voice. Sir James turned to her.

“Lock the door on the outside, please, Miss Tuppence, and take out the
key. There must be no chance of anyone entering that room.”

The gravity of his manner impressed them, and Tuppence felt less ashamed
of her attack of “nerves.”

“Say,” remarked Julius suddenly, “there’s Tuppence’s bright boy. I guess
I’d better go down and ease his young mind. That’s some lad, Tuppence.”

“How did you get in, by the way?” asked Tuppence suddenly. “I forgot to
ask.”

“Well, Albert got me on the phone all right. I ran round for Sir James
here, and we came right on. The boy was on the look out for us, and was
just a mite worried about what might have happened to you. He’d been
listening outside the door of the flat, but couldn’t hear anything.
Anyhow he suggested sending us up in the coal lift instead of ringing
the bell. And sure enough we landed in the scullery and came right along
to find you. Albert’s still below, and must be just hopping mad by this
time.” With which Julius departed abruptly.

“Now then, Miss Tuppence,” said Sir James, “you know this place better
than I do. Where do you suggest we should take up our quarters?”

Tuppence considered for a moment or two.

“I think Mrs. Vandemeyer’s boudoir would be the most comfortable,” she
said at last, and led the way there.

Sir James looked round approvingly.

“This will do very well, and now, my dear young lady, do go to bed and
get some sleep.”

Tuppence shook her head resolutely.

“I couldn’t, thank you, Sir James. I should dream of Mr. Brown all
night!”

“But you’ll be so tired, child.”

“No, I shan’t. I’d rather stay up--really.”

The lawyer gave in.

Julius reappeared some minutes later, having reassured Albert and
rewarded him lavishly for his services. Having in his turn failed to
persuade Tuppence to go to bed, he said decisively:

“At any rate, you’ve got to have something to eat right away. Where’s
the larder?”

Tuppence directed him, and he returned in a few minutes with a cold pie
and three plates.

After a hearty meal, the girl felt inclined to pooh-pooh her fancies of
half an hour before. The power of the money bribe could not fail.

“And now, Miss Tuppence,” said Sir James, “we want to hear your
adventures.”

“That’s so,” agreed Julius.

Tuppence narrated her adventures with some complacence. Julius
occasionally interjected an admiring “Bully.” Sir James said nothing
until she had finished, when his quiet “well done, Miss Tuppence,” made
her flush with pleasure.

“There’s one thing I don’t get clearly,” said Julius. “What put her up
to clearing out?”

“I don’t know,” confessed Tuppence.

Sir James stroked his chin thoughtfully.

“The room was in great disorder. That looks as though her flight was
unpremeditated. Almost as though she got a sudden warning to go from
some one.”

“Mr. Brown, I suppose,” said Julius scoffingly.

The lawyer looked at him deliberately for a minute or two.

“Why not?” he said. “Remember, you yourself have once been worsted by
him.”

Julius flushed with vexation.

“I feel just mad when I think of how I handed out Jane’s photograph to
him like a lamb. Gee, if I ever lay hands on it again, I’ll freeze on to
it like--like hell!”

“That contingency is likely to be a remote one,” said the other dryly.

“I guess you’re right,” said Julius frankly. “And, in any case, it’s the
original I’m out after. Where do you think she can be, Sir James?”

The lawyer shook his head.

“Impossible to say. But I’ve a very good idea where she _has_ been.”

“You have? Where?”

Sir James smiled.

“At the scene of your nocturnal adventures, the Bournemouth nursing
home.”

“There? Impossible. I asked.”

“No, my dear sir, you asked if anyone of the name of Jane Finn had been
there. Now, if the girl had been placed there it would almost certainly
be under an assumed name.”

“Bully for you,” cried Julius. “I never thought of that!”

“It was fairly obvious,” said the other.

“Perhaps the doctor’s in it too,” suggested Tuppence.

Julius shook his head.

“I don’t think so. I took to him at once. No, I’m pretty sure Dr. Hall’s
all right.”

“Hall, did you say?” asked Sir James. “That is curious--really very
curious.”

“Why?” demanded Tuppence.

“Because I happened to meet him this morning. I’ve known him slightly on
and off for some years, and this morning I ran across him in the street.
Staying at the _Métropole_, he told me.” He turned to Julius. “Didn’t
he tell you he was coming up to town?”

Julius shook his head.

“Curious,” mused Sir James. “You did not mention his name this
afternoon, or I would have suggested your going to him for further
information with my card as introduction.”

“I guess I’m a mutt,” said Julius with unusual humility. “I ought to
have thought of the false name stunt.”

“How could you think of anything after falling out of that tree?” cried
Tuppence. “I’m sure anyone else would have been killed right off.”

“Well, I guess it doesn’t matter now, anyway,” said Julius. “We’ve got
Mrs. Vandemeyer on a string, and that’s all we need.”

“Yes,” said Tuppence, but there was a lack of assurance in her voice.

A silence settled down over the party. Little by little the magic of
the night began to gain a hold on them. There were sudden creaks of the
furniture, imperceptible rustlings in the curtains. Suddenly Tuppence
sprang up with a cry.

“I can’t help it. I know Mr. Brown’s somewhere in the flat! I can _feel_
him.”

“Sure, Tuppence, how could he be? This door’s open into the hall. No
one could have come in by the front door without our seeing and hearing
him.”

“I can’t help it. I _feel_ he’s here!”

She looked appealingly at Sir James, who replied gravely:

“With due deference to your feelings, Miss Tuppence (and mine as well
for that matter), I do not see how it is humanly possible for anyone to
be in the flat without our knowledge.”

The girl was a little comforted by his words.

“Sitting up at night is always rather jumpy,” she confessed.

“Yes,” said Sir James. “We are in the condition of people holding a
séance. Perhaps if a medium were present we might get some marvellous
results.”

“Do you believe in spiritualism?” asked Tuppence, opening her eyes wide.

The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.

“There is some truth in it, without a doubt. But most of the testimony
would not pass muster in the witness-box.”

The hours drew on. With the first faint glimmerings of dawn, Sir James
drew aside the curtains. They beheld, what few Londoners see, the slow
rising of the sun over the sleeping city. Somehow, with the coming
of the light, the dreads and fancies of the past night seemed absurd.
Tuppence’s spirits revived to the normal.

“Hooray!” she said. “It’s going to be a gorgeous day. And we shall find
Tommy. And Jane Finn. And everything will be lovely. I shall ask Mr.
Carter if I can’t be made a Dame!”

At seven o’clock Tuppence volunteered to go and make some tea. She
returned with a tray, containing the teapot and four cups.

“Who’s the other cup for?” inquired Julius.

“The prisoner, of course. I suppose we might call her that?”

“Taking her tea seems a kind of anticlimax to last night,” said Julius
thoughtfully.

“Yes, it does,” admitted Tuppence. “But, anyway, here goes. Perhaps
you’d both come, too, in case she springs on me, or anything. You see,
we don’t know what mood she’ll wake up in.”

Sir James and Julius accompanied her to the door.

“Where’s the key? Oh, of course, I’ve got it myself.”

She put it in the lock, and turned it, then paused.

“Supposing, after all, she’s escaped?” she murmured in a whisper.

“Plumb impossible,” replied Julius reassuringly.

But Sir James said nothing.

Tuppence drew a long breath and entered. She heaved a sigh of relief as
she saw that Mrs. Vandemeyer was lying on the bed.

“Good morning,” she remarked cheerfully. “I’ve brought you some tea.”

Mrs. Vandemeyer did not reply. Tuppence put down the cup on the table
by the bed and went across to draw up the blinds. When she turned, Mrs.
Vandemeyer still lay without a movement. With a sudden fear clutching
at her heart, Tuppence ran to the bed. The hand she lifted was cold as
ice.... Mrs. Vandemeyer would never speak now....

Her cry brought the others. A very few minutes sufficed. Mrs. Vandemeyer
was dead--must have been dead some hours. She had evidently died in her
sleep.

“If that isn’t the cruellest luck,” cried Julius in despair.

The lawyer was calmer, but there was a curious gleam in his eyes.

“If it is luck,” he replied.

“You don’t think--but, say, that’s plumb impossible--no one could have
got in.”

“No,” admitted the lawyer. “I don’t see how they could. And yet--she is
on the point of betraying Mr. Brown, and--she dies. Is it only chance?”

“But how----”

“Yes, _how!_ That is what we must find out.” He stood there silently,
gently stroking his chin. “We must find out,” he said quietly, and
Tuppence felt that if she was Mr. Brown she would not like the tone of
those simple words.

Julius’s glance went to the window.

“The window’s open,” he remarked. “Do you think----”

Tuppence shook her head.

“The balcony only goes along as far as the boudoir. We were there.”

“He might have slipped out----” suggested Julius.

But Sir James interrupted him.

“Mr. Brown’s methods are not so crude. In the meantime we must send for
a doctor, but before we do so, is there anything in this room that might
be of value to us?”

Hastily, the three searched. A charred mass in the grate indicated
that Mrs. Vandemeyer had been burning papers on the eve of her flight.
Nothing of importance remained, though they searched the other rooms as
well.

“There’s that,” said Tuppence suddenly, pointing to a small,
old-fashioned safe let into the wall. “It’s for jewellery, I believe,
but there might be something else in it.”

The key was in the lock, and Julius swung open the door, and searched
inside. He was some time over the task.

“Well,” said Tuppence impatiently.

There was a pause before Julius answered, then he withdrew his head and
shut to the door.

“Nothing,” he said.

In five minutes a brisk young doctor arrived, hastily summoned. He was
deferential to Sir James, whom he recognized.

“Heart failure, or possibly an overdose of some sleeping-draught.” He
sniffed. “Rather an odour of chloral in the air.”

Tuppence remembered the glass she had upset. A new thought drove her to
the washstand. She found the little bottle from which Mrs. Vandemeyer
had poured a few drops.

It had been three parts full. Now-- _it was empty_.



CHAPTER XIV. A CONSULTATION

NOTHING was more surprising and bewildering to Tuppence than the ease
and simplicity with which everything was arranged, owing to Sir James’s
skilful handling. The doctor accepted quite readily the theory that Mrs.
Vandemeyer had accidentally taken an overdose of chloral. He doubted
whether an inquest would be necessary. If so, he would let Sir James
know. He understood that Mrs. Vandemeyer was on the eve of departure for
abroad, and that the servants had already left? Sir James and his young
friends had been paying a call upon her, when she was suddenly stricken
down and they had spent the night in the flat, not liking to leave
her alone. Did they know of any relatives? They did not, but Sir James
referred him to Mrs. Vandemeyer’s solicitor.

Shortly afterwards a nurse arrived to take charge, and the other left
the ill-omened building.

“And what now?” asked Julius, with a gesture of despair. “I guess we’re
down and out for good.”

Sir James stroked his chin thoughtfully.

“No,” he said quietly. “There is still the chance that Dr. Hall may be
able to tell us something.”

“Gee! I’d forgotten him.”

“The chance is slight, but it must not be neglected. I think I told you
that he is staying at the _Métropole_. I should suggest that we call
upon him there as soon as possible. Shall we say after a bath and
breakfast?”

It was arranged that Tuppence and Julius should return to the _Ritz_,
and call for Sir James in the car. This programme was faithfully carried
out, and a little after eleven they drew up before the _Métropole_.
They asked for Dr. Hall, and a page-boy went in search of him. In a few
minutes the little doctor came hurrying towards them.

“Can you spare us a few minutes, Dr. Hall?” said Sir James pleasantly.
“Let me introduce you to Miss Cowley. Mr. Hersheimmer, I think, you
already know.”

A quizzical gleam came into the doctor’s eye as he shook hands with
Julius.

“Ah, yes, my young friend of the tree episode! Ankle all right, eh?”

“I guess it’s cured owing to your skilful treatment, doc.”

“And the heart trouble? Ha ha!”

“Still searching,” said Julius briefly.

“To come to the point, can we have a word with you in private?” asked
Sir James.

“Certainly. I think there is a room here where we shall be quite
undisturbed.”

He led the way, and the others followed him. They sat down, and the
doctor looked inquiringly at Sir James.

“Dr. Hall, I am very anxious to find a certain young lady for the
purpose of obtaining a statement from her. I have reason to believe
that she has been at one time or another in your establishment at
Bournemouth. I hope I am transgressing no professional etiquette in
questioning you on the subject?”

“I suppose it is a matter of testimony?”

Sir James hesitated a moment, then he replied:

“Yes.”

“I shall be pleased to give you any information in my power. What is
the young lady’s name? Mr. Hersheimmer asked me, I remember----” He half
turned to Julius.

“The name,” said Sir James bluntly, “is really immaterial. She would be
almost certainly sent to you under an assumed one. But I should like to
know if you are acquainted with a Mrs. Vandemeyer?”

“Mrs. Vandemeyer, of 20 South Audley Mansions? I know her slightly.”

“You are not aware of what has happened?”

“What do you mean?”

“You do not know that Mrs. Vandemeyer is dead?”

“Dear, dear, I had no idea of it! When did it happen?”

“She took an overdose of chloral last night.”

“Purposely?”

“Accidentally, it is believed. I should not like to say myself. Anyway,
she was found dead this morning.”

“Very sad. A singularly handsome woman. I presume she was a friend of
yours, since you are acquainted with all these details.”

“I am acquainted with the details because--well, it was I who found her
dead.”

“Indeed,” said the doctor, starting.

“Yes,” said Sir James, and stroked his chin reflectively.

“This is very sad news, but you will excuse me if I say that I do not
see how it bears on the subject of your inquiry?”

“It bears on it in this way, is it not a fact that Mrs. Vandemeyer
committed a young relative of hers to your charge?”

Julius leaned forward eagerly.

“That is the case,” said the doctor quietly.

“Under the name of----?”

“Janet Vandemeyer. I understood her to be a niece of Mrs. Vandemeyer’s.”

“And she came to you?”

“As far as I can remember in June or July of 1915.”

“Was she a mental case?”

“She is perfectly sane, if that is what you mean. I understood from Mrs.
Vandemeyer that the girl had been with her on the _Lusitania_ when
that ill-fated ship was sunk, and had suffered a severe shock in
consequence.”

“We’re on the right track, I think?” Sir James looked round.

“As I said before, I’m a mutt!” returned Julius.

The doctor looked at them all curiously.

“You spoke of wanting a statement from her,” he said. “Supposing she is
not able to give one?”

“What? You have just said that she is perfectly sane.”

“So she is. Nevertheless, if you want a statement from her concerning
any events prior to May 7, 1915, she will not be able to give it to
you.”

They looked at the little man, stupefied. He nodded cheerfully.

“It’s a pity,” he said. “A great pity, especially as I gather, Sir
James, that the matter is important. But there it is, she can tell you
nothing.”

“But why, man? Darn it all, why?”

The little man shifted his benevolent glance to the excited young
American.

“Because Janet Vandemeyer is suffering from a complete loss of memory.”

_“What?”_

“Quite so. An interesting case, a _very_ interesting case. Not so
uncommon, really, as you would think. There are several very well known
parallels. It’s the first case of the kind that I’ve had under my own
personal observation, and I must admit that I’ve found it of absorbing
interest.” There was something rather ghoulish in the little man’s
satisfaction.

“And she remembers nothing,” said Sir James slowly.

“Nothing prior to May 7, 1915. After that date her memory is as good as
yours or mine.”

“Then the first thing she remembers?”

“Is landing with the survivors. Everything before that is a blank. She
did not know her own name, or where she had come from, or where she was.
She couldn’t even speak her own tongue.”

“But surely all this is most unusual?” put in Julius.

“No, my dear sir. Quite normal under the circumstances. Severe shock to
the nervous system. Loss of memory proceeds nearly always on the same
lines. I suggested a specialist, of course. There’s a very good man in
Paris--makes a study of these cases--but Mrs. Vandemeyer opposed the
idea of publicity that might result from such a course.”

“I can imagine she would,” said Sir James grimly.

“I fell in with her views. There is a certain notoriety given to these
cases. And the girl was very young--nineteen, I believe. It seemed
a pity that her infirmity should be talked about--might damage her
prospects. Besides, there is no special treatment to pursue in such
cases. It is really a matter of waiting.”

“Waiting?”

“Yes, sooner or later, the memory will return--as suddenly as it
went. But in all probability the girl will have entirely forgotten the
intervening period, and will take up life where she left off--at the
sinking of the _Lusitania_.”

“And when do you expect this to happen?”

The doctor shrugged his shoulders.

“Ah, that I cannot say. Sometimes it is a matter of months, sometimes
it has been known to be as long as twenty years! Sometimes another shock
does the trick. One restores what the other took away.”

“Another shock, eh?” said Julius thoughtfully.

“Exactly. There was a case in Colorado----” The little man’s voice
trailed on, voluble, mildly enthusiastic.

Julius did not seem to be listening. He had relapsed into his own
thoughts and was frowning. Suddenly he came out of his brown study,
and hit the table such a resounding bang with his fist that every one
jumped, the doctor most of all.

“I’ve got it! I guess, doc, I’d like your medical opinion on the plan
I’m about to outline. Say Jane was to cross the herring pond again, and
the same thing was to happen. The submarine, the sinking ship, every one
to take to the boats--and so on. Wouldn’t that do the trick? Wouldn’t it
give a mighty big bump to her subconscious self, or whatever the jargon
is, and start it functioning again right away?”

“A very interesting speculation, Mr. Hersheimmer. In my own opinion, it
would be successful. It is unfortunate that there is no chance of the
conditions repeating themselves as you suggest.”

“Not by nature, perhaps, doc. But I’m talking about art.”

“Art?”

“Why, yes. What’s the difficulty? Hire a liner----”

“A liner!” murmured Dr. Hall faintly.

“Hire some passengers, hire a submarine--that’s the only difficulty, I
guess. Governments are apt to be a bit hide-bound over their engines of
war. They won’t sell to the first-comer. Still, I guess that can be got
over. Ever heard of the word ‘graft,’ sir? Well, graft gets there every
time! I reckon that we shan’t really need to fire a torpedo. If every
one hustles round and screams loud enough that the ship is sinking, it
ought to be enough for an innocent young girl like Jane. By the time
she’s got a life-belt on her, and is being hustled into a boat, with
a well-drilled lot of artistes doing the hysterical stunt on deck,
why--she ought to be right back where she was in May, 1915. How’s that
for the bare outline?”

Dr. Hall looked at Julius. Everything that he was for the moment
incapable of saying was eloquent in that look.

“No,” said Julius, in answer to it, “I’m not crazy. The thing’s
perfectly possible. It’s done every day in the States for the movies.
Haven’t you seen trains in collision on the screen? What’s the
difference between buying up a train and buying up a liner? Get the
properties and you can go right ahead!”

Dr. Hall found his voice.

“But the expense, my dear sir.” His voice rose. “The expense! It will be
_colossal!_”

“Money doesn’t worry me any,” explained Julius simply.

Dr. Hall turned an appealing face to Sir James, who smiled slightly.

“Mr. Hersheimmer is very well off--very well off indeed.”

The doctor’s glance came back to Julius with a new and subtle quality in
it. This was no longer an eccentric young fellow with a habit of falling
off trees. The doctor’s eyes held the deference accorded to a really
rich man.

“Very remarkable plan. Very remarkable,” he murmured. “The movies--of
course! Your American word for the kinema. Very interesting. I fear we
are perhaps a little behind the times over here in our methods. And you
really mean to carry out this remarkable plan of yours.”

“You bet your bottom dollar I do.”

The doctor believed him--which was a tribute to his nationality. If an
Englishman had suggested such a thing, he would have had grave doubts as
to his sanity.

“I cannot guarantee a cure,” he pointed out. “Perhaps I ought to make
that quite clear.”

“Sure, that’s all right,” said Julius. “You just trot out Jane, and
leave the rest to me.”

“Jane?”

“Miss Janet Vandemeyer, then. Can we get on the long distance to your
place right away, and ask them to send her up; or shall I run down and
fetch her in my car?”

The doctor stared.

“I beg your pardon, Mr. Hersheimmer. I thought you understood.”

“Understood what?”

“That Miss Vandemeyer is no longer under my care.”



CHAPTER XV. TUPPENCE RECEIVES A PROPOSAL

JULIUS sprang up.

“What?”

“I thought you were aware of that.”

“When did she leave?”

“Let me see. To-day is Monday, is it not? It must have been last
Wednesday--why, surely--yes, it was the same evening that you--er--fell
out of my tree.”

“That evening? Before, or after?”

“Let me see--oh yes, afterwards. A very urgent message arrived from Mrs.
Vandemeyer. The young lady and the nurse who was in charge of her left
by the night train.”

Julius sank back again into his chair.

“Nurse Edith--left with a patient--I remember,” he muttered. “My God, to
have been so near!”

Dr. Hall looked bewildered.

“I don’t understand. Is the young lady not with her aunt, after all?”

Tuppence shook her head. She was about to speak when a warning glance
from Sir James made her hold her tongue. The lawyer rose.

“I’m much obliged to you, Hall. We’re very grateful for all you’ve
told us. I’m afraid we’re now in the position of having to track Miss
Vandemeyer anew. What about the nurse who accompanied her; I suppose you
don’t know where she is?”

The doctor shook his head.

“We’ve not heard from her, as it happens. I understood she was to remain
with Miss Vandemeyer for a while. But what can have happened? Surely the
girl has not been kidnapped.”

“That remains to be seen,” said Sir James gravely.

The other hesitated.

“You do not think I ought to go to the police?”

“No, no. In all probability the young lady is with other relations.”

The doctor was not completely satisfied, but he saw that Sir James was
determined to say no more, and realized that to try and extract
more information from the famous K.C. would be mere waste of labour.
Accordingly, he wished them goodbye, and they left the hotel. For a few
minutes they stood by the car talking.

“How maddening,” cried Tuppence. “To think that Julius must have been
actually under the same roof with her for a few hours.”

“I was a darned idiot,” muttered Julius gloomily.

“You couldn’t know,” Tuppence consoled him. “Could he?” She appealed to
Sir James.

“I should advise you not to worry,” said the latter kindly. “No use
crying over spilt milk, you know.”

“The great thing is what to do next,” added Tuppence the practical.

Sir James shrugged his shoulders.

“You might advertise for the nurse who accompanied the girl. That is
the only course I can suggest, and I must confess I do not hope for much
result. Otherwise there is nothing to be done.”

“Nothing?” said Tuppence blankly. “And--Tommy?”

“We must hope for the best,” said Sir James. “Oh yes, we must go on
hoping.”

But over her downcast head his eyes met Julius’s, and almost
imperceptibly he shook his head. Julius understood. The lawyer
considered the case hopeless. The young American’s face grew grave. Sir
James took Tuppence’s hand.

“You must let me know if anything further comes to light. Letters will
always be forwarded.”

Tuppence stared at him blankly.

“You are going away?”

“I told you. Don’t you remember? To Scotland.”

“Yes, but I thought----” The girl hesitated.

Sir James shrugged his shoulders.

“My dear young lady, I can do nothing more, I fear. Our clues have all
ended in thin air. You can take my word for it that there is nothing
more to be done. If anything should arise, I shall be glad to advise you
in any way I can.”

His words gave Tuppence an extraordinarily desolate feeling.

“I suppose you’re right,” she said. “Anyway, thank you very much for
trying to help us. Good-bye.”

Julius was bending over the car. A momentary pity came into Sir James’s
keen eyes, as he gazed into the girl’s downcast face.

“Don’t be too disconsolate, Miss Tuppence,” he said in a low voice.
“Remember, holiday-time isn’t always all playtime. One sometimes manages
to put in some work as well.”

Something in his tone made Tuppence glance up sharply. He shook his head
with a smile.

“No, I shan’t say any more. Great mistake to say too much. Remember
that. Never tell all you know--not even to the person you know best.
Understand? Good-bye.”

He strode away. Tuppence stared after him. She was beginning to
understand Sir James’s methods. Once before he had thrown her a hint
in the same careless fashion. Was this a hint? What exactly lay
behind those last brief words? Did he mean that, after all, he had not
abandoned the case; that, secretly, he would be working on it still
while----

Her meditations were interrupted by Julius, who adjured her to “get
right in.”

“You’re looking kind of thoughtful,” he remarked as they started off.
“Did the old guy say anything more?”

Tuppence opened her mouth impulsively, and then shut it again. Sir
James’s words sounded in her ears: “Never tell all you know--not even
to the person you know best.” And like a flash there came into her mind
another memory. Julius before the safe in the flat, her own question and
the pause before his reply, “Nothing.” Was there really nothing? Or
had he found something he wished to keep to himself? If he could make a
reservation, so could she.

“Nothing particular,” she replied.

She felt rather than saw Julius throw a sideways glance at her.

“Say, shall we go for a spin in the park?”

“If you like.”

For a while they ran on under the trees in silence. It was a beautiful
day. The keen rush through the air brought a new exhilaration to
Tuppence.

“Say, Miss Tuppence, do you think I’m ever going to find Jane?”

Julius spoke in a discouraged voice. The mood was so alien to him that
Tuppence turned and stared at him in surprise. He nodded.

“That’s so. I’m getting down and out over the business. Sir James to-day
hadn’t got any hope at all, I could see that. I don’t like him--we don’t
gee together somehow--but he’s pretty cute, and I guess he wouldn’t quit
if there was any chance of success--now, would he?”

Tuppence felt rather uncomfortable, but clinging to her belief that
Julius also had withheld something from her, she remained firm.

“He suggested advertising for the nurse,” she reminded him.

“Yes, with a ‘forlorn hope’ flavour to his voice! No--I’m about fed up.
I’ve half a mind to go back to the States right away.”

“Oh no!” cried Tuppence. “We’ve got to find Tommy.”

“I sure forgot Beresford,” said Julius contritely. “That’s so. We must
find him. But after--well, I’ve been day-dreaming ever since I started
on this trip--and these dreams are rotten poor business. I’m quit of
them. Say, Miss Tuppence, there’s something I’d like to ask you.”

“Yes?”

“You and Beresford. What about it?”

“I don’t understand you,” replied Tuppence with dignity, adding rather
inconsequently: “And, anyway, you’re wrong!”

“Not got a sort of kindly feeling for one another?”

“Certainly not,” said Tuppence with warmth. “Tommy and I are
friends--nothing more.”

“I guess every pair of lovers has said that sometime or another,”
 observed Julius.

“Nonsense!” snapped Tuppence. “Do I look the sort of girl that’s always
falling in love with every man she meets?”

“You do not. You look the sort of girl that’s mighty often getting
fallen in love with!”

“Oh!” said Tuppence, rather taken aback. “That’s a compliment, I
suppose?”

“Sure. Now let’s get down to this. Supposing we never find Beresford
and--and----”

“All right--say it! I can face facts. Supposing he’s--dead! Well?”

“And all this business fiddles out. What are you going to do?”

“I don’t know,” said Tuppence forlornly.

“You’ll be darned lonesome, you poor kid.”

“I shall be all right,” snapped Tuppence with her usual resentment of
any kind of pity.

“What about marriage?” inquired Julius. “Got any views on the subject?”

“I intend to marry, of course,” replied Tuppence. “That is, if”--she
paused, knew a momentary longing to draw back, and then stuck to her
guns bravely--“I can find some one rich enough to make it worth my
while. That’s frank, isn’t it? I dare say you despise me for it.”

“I never despise business instinct,” said Julius. “What particular
figure have you in mind?”

“Figure?” asked Tuppence, puzzled. “Do you mean tall or short?”

“No. Sum--income.”

“Oh, I--I haven’t quite worked that out.”

“What about me?”

_“You?”_

“Sure thing.”

“Oh, I couldn’t!”

“Why not?”

“I tell you I couldn’t.”

“Again, why not?”

“It would seem so unfair.”

“I don’t see anything unfair about it. I call your bluff, that’s all. I
admire you immensely, Miss Tuppence, more than any girl I’ve ever met.
You’re so darned plucky. I’d just love to give you a real, rattling good
time. Say the word, and we’ll run round right away to some high-class
jeweller, and fix up the ring business.”

“I can’t,” gasped Tuppence.

“Because of Beresford?”

“No, no, _no!_”

“Well then?”

Tuppence merely continued to shake her head violently.

“You can’t reasonably expect more dollars than I’ve got.”

“Oh, it isn’t that,” gasped Tuppence with an almost hysterical laugh.
“But thanking you very much, and all that, I think I’d better say no.”

“I’d be obliged if you’d do me the favour to think it over until
to-morrow.”

“It’s no use.”

“Still, I guess we’ll leave it like that.”

“Very well,” said Tuppence meekly.

Neither of them spoke again until they reached the _Ritz_.

Tuppence went upstairs to her room. She felt morally battered to the
ground after her conflict with Julius’s vigorous personality. Sitting
down in front of the glass, she stared at her own reflection for some
minutes.

“Fool,” murmured Tuppence at length, making a grimace. “Little fool.
Everything you want--everything you’ve ever hoped for, and you go and
bleat out ‘no’ like an idiotic little sheep. It’s your one chance. Why
don’t you take it? Grab it? Snatch at it? What more do you want?”

As if in answer to her own question, her eyes fell on a small snapshot
of Tommy that stood on her dressing-table in a shabby frame. For a
moment she struggled for self-control, and then abandoning all presence,
she held it to her lips and burst into a fit of sobbing.

“Oh, Tommy, Tommy,” she cried, “I do love you so--and I may never see
you again....”

At the end of five minutes Tuppence sat up, blew her nose, and pushed
back her hair.

“That’s that,” she observed sternly. “Let’s look facts in the face. I
seem to have fallen in love--with an idiot of a boy who probably doesn’t
care two straws about me.” Here she paused. “Anyway,” she resumed, as
though arguing with an unseen opponent, “I don’t _know_ that he does.
He’d never have dared to say so. I’ve always jumped on sentiment--and
here I am being more sentimental than anybody. What idiots girls are!
I’ve always thought so. I suppose I shall sleep with his photograph
under my pillow, and dream about him all night. It’s dreadful to feel
you’ve been false to your principles.”

Tuppence shook her head sadly, as she reviewed her backsliding.

“I don’t know what to say to Julius, I’m sure. Oh, what a fool I feel!
I’ll have to say _something_--he’s so American and thorough, he’ll
insist upon having a reason. I wonder if he did find anything in that
safe----”

Tuppence’s meditations went off on another tack. She reviewed the events
of last night carefully and persistently. Somehow, they seemed bound up
with Sir James’s enigmatical words....

Suddenly she gave a great start--the colour faded out of her face. Her
eyes, fascinated, gazed in front of her, the pupils dilated.

“Impossible,” she murmured. “Impossible! I must be going mad even to
think of such a thing....”

Monstrous--yet it explained everything....

After a moment’s reflection she sat down and wrote a note, weighing each
word as she did so. Finally she nodded her head as though satisfied, and
slipped it into an envelope which she addressed to Julius. She went
down the passage to his sitting-room and knocked at the door. As she had
expected, the room was empty. She left the note on the table.

A small page-boy was waiting outside her own door when she returned to
it.

“Telegram for you, miss.”

Tuppence took it from the salver, and tore it open carelessly. Then she
gave a cry. The telegram was from Tommy!



CHAPTER XVI. FURTHER ADVENTURES OF TOMMY

FROM a darkness punctuated with throbbing stabs of fire, Tommy dragged
his senses slowly back to life. When he at last opened his eyes, he was
conscious of nothing but an excruciating pain through his temples. He
was vaguely aware of unfamiliar surroundings. Where was he? What had
happened? He blinked feebly. This was not his bedroom at the _Ritz_. And
what the devil was the matter with his head?

“Damn!” said Tommy, and tried to sit up. He had remembered. He was in
that sinister house in Soho. He uttered a groan and fell back. Through
his almost-closed lids he reconnoitred carefully.

“He is coming to,” remarked a voice very near Tommy’s ear. He recognized
it at once for that of the bearded and efficient German, and lay
artistically inert. He felt that it would be a pity to come round too
soon; and until the pain in his head became a little less acute, he felt
quite incapable of collecting his wits. Painfully he tried to puzzle out
what had happened. Obviously somebody must have crept up behind him as
he listened and struck him down with a blow on the head. They knew
him now for a spy, and would in all probability give him short shrift.
Undoubtedly he was in a tight place. Nobody knew where he was, therefore
he need expect no outside assistance, and must depend solely on his own
wits.

“Well, here goes,” murmured Tommy to himself, and repeated his former
remark.

“Damn!” he observed, and this time succeeded in sitting up.

In a minute the German stepped forward and placed a glass to his lips,
with the brief command “Drink.” Tommy obeyed. The potency of the draught
made him choke, but it cleared his brain in a marvellous manner.

He was lying on a couch in the room in which the meeting had been held.
On one side of him was the German, on the other the villainous-faced
doorkeeper who had let him in. The others were grouped together at a
little distance away. But Tommy missed one face. The man known as Number
One was no longer of the company.

“Feel better?” asked the German, as he removed the empty glass.

“Yes, thanks,” returned Tommy cheerfully.

“Ah, my young friend, it is lucky for you your skull is so thick. The
good Conrad struck hard.” He indicated the evil-faced doorkeeper by a
nod. The man grinned.

Tommy twisted his head round with an effort.

“Oh,” he said, “so you’re Conrad, are you? It strikes me the thickness
of my skull was lucky for you too. When I look at you I feel it’s almost
a pity I’ve enabled you to cheat the hangman.”

The man snarled, and the bearded man said quietly:

“He would have run no risk of that.”

“Just as you like,” replied Tommy. “I know it’s the fashion to run down
the police. I rather believe in them myself.”

His manner was nonchalant to the last degree. Tommy Beresford was one
of those young Englishmen not distinguished by any special intellectual
ability, but who are emphatically at their best in what is known as a
“tight place.” Their natural diffidence and caution fall from them like
a glove. Tommy realized perfectly that in his own wits lay the only
chance of escape, and behind his casual manner he was racking his brains
furiously.

The cold accents of the German took up the conversation:

“Have you anything to say before you are put to death as a spy?”

“Simply lots of things,” replied Tommy with the same urbanity as before.

“Do you deny that you were listening at that door?”

“I do not. I must really apologize--but your conversation was so
interesting that it overcame my scruples.”

“How did you get in?”

“Dear old Conrad here.” Tommy smiled deprecatingly at him. “I hesitate
to suggest pensioning off a faithful servant, but you really ought to
have a better watchdog.”

Conrad snarled impotently, and said sullenly, as the man with the beard
swung round upon him:

“He gave the word. How was I to know?”

“Yes,” Tommy chimed in. “How was he to know? Don’t blame the poor
fellow. His hasty action has given me the pleasure of seeing you all
face to face.”

He fancied that his words caused some discomposure among the group, but
the watchful German stilled it with a wave of his hand.

“Dead men tell no tales,” he said evenly.

“Ah,” said Tommy, “but I’m not dead yet!”

“You soon will be, my young friend,” said the German.

An assenting murmur came from the others.

Tommy’s heart beat faster, but his casual pleasantness did not waver.

“I think not,” he said firmly. “I should have a great objection to
dying.”

He had got them puzzled, he saw that by the look on his captor’s face.

“Can you give us any reason why we should not put you to death?” asked
the German.

“Several,” replied Tommy. “Look here, you’ve been asking me a lot of
questions. Let me ask you one for a change. Why didn’t you kill me off
at once before I regained consciousness?”

The German hesitated, and Tommy seized his advantage.

“Because you didn’t know how much I knew--and where I obtained that
knowledge. If you kill me now, you never will know.”

But here the emotions of Boris became too much for him. He stepped
forward waving his arms.

“You hell-hound of a spy,” he screamed. “We will give you short shrift.
Kill him! Kill him!”

There was a roar of applause.

“You hear?” said the German, his eyes on Tommy. “What have you to say to
that?”

“Say?” Tommy shrugged his shoulders. “Pack of fools. Let them ask
themselves a few questions. How did I get into this place? Remember what
dear old Conrad said-- _with your own password_, wasn’t it? How did I
get hold of that? You don’t suppose I came up those steps haphazard and
said the first thing that came into my head?”

Tommy was pleased with the concluding words of this speech. His only
regret was that Tuppence was not present to appreciate its full flavour.

“That is true,” said the working man suddenly. “Comrades, we have been
betrayed!”

An ugly murmur arose. Tommy smiled at them encouragingly.

“That’s better. How can you hope to make a success of any job if you
don’t use your brains?”

“You will tell us who has betrayed us,” said the German. “But that shall
not save you--oh, no! You shall tell us all that you know. Boris, here,
knows pretty ways of making people speak!”

“Bah!” said Tommy scornfully, fighting down a singularly unpleasant
feeling in the pit of his stomach. “You will neither torture me nor kill
me.”

“And why not?” asked Boris.

“Because you’d kill the goose that lays the golden eggs,” replied Tommy
quietly.

There was a momentary pause. It seemed as though Tommy’s persistent
assurance was at last conquering. They were no longer completely sure of
themselves. The man in the shabby clothes stared at Tommy searchingly.

“He’s bluffing you, Boris,” he said quietly.

Tommy hated him. Had the man seen through him?

The German, with an effort, turned roughly to Tommy.

“What do you mean?”

“What do you think I mean?” parried Tommy, searching desperately in his
own mind.

Suddenly Boris stepped forward, and shook his fist in Tommy’s face.

“Speak, you swine of an Englishman--speak!”

“Don’t get so excited, my good fellow,” said Tommy calmly. “That’s the
worst of you foreigners. You can’t keep calm. Now, I ask you, do I look
as though I thought there were the least chance of your killing me?”

He looked confidently round, and was glad they could not hear the
persistent beating of his heart which gave the lie to his words.

“No,” admitted Boris at last sullenly, “you do not.”

“Thank God, he’s not a mind reader,” thought Tommy. Aloud he pursued his
advantage:

“And why am I so confident? Because I know something that puts me in a
position to propose a bargain.”

“A bargain?” The bearded man took him up sharply.

“Yes--a bargain. My life and liberty against----” He paused.

“Against what?”

The group pressed forward. You could have heard a pin drop.

Slowly Tommy spoke.

“The papers that Danvers brought over from America in the _Lusitania_.”

The effect of his words was electrical. Every one was on his feet.
The German waved them back. He leaned over Tommy, his face purple with
excitement.

“_Himmel!_ You have got them, then?”

With magnificent calm Tommy shook his head.

“You know where they are?” persisted the German.

Again Tommy shook his head. “Not in the least.”

“Then--then----” angry and baffled, the words failed him.

Tommy looked round. He saw anger and bewilderment on every face, but his
calm assurance had done its work--no one doubted but that something lay
behind his words.

“I don’t know where the papers are--but I believe that I can find them.
I have a theory----”

“Pah!”

Tommy raised his hand, and silenced the clamours of disgust.

“I call it a theory--but I’m pretty sure of my facts--facts that are
known to no one but myself. In any case what do you lose? If I can
produce the papers--you give me my life and liberty in exchange. Is it a
bargain?”

“And if we refuse?” said the German quietly.

Tommy lay back on the couch.

“The 29th,” he said thoughtfully, “is less than a fortnight ahead----”

For a moment the German hesitated. Then he made a sign to Conrad.

“Take him into the other room.”

For five minutes, Tommy sat on the bed in the dingy room next door. His
heart was beating violently. He had risked all on this throw. How would
they decide? And all the while that this agonized questioning went on
within him, he talked flippantly to Conrad, enraging the cross-grained
doorkeeper to the point of homicidal mania.

At last the door opened, and the German called imperiously to Conrad to
return.

“Let’s hope the judge hasn’t put his black cap on,” remarked Tommy
frivolously. “That’s right, Conrad, march me in. The prisoner is at the
bar, gentlemen.”

The German was seated once more behind the table. He motioned to Tommy
to sit down opposite to him.

“We accept,” he said harshly, “on terms. The papers must be delivered to
us before you go free.”

“Idiot!” said Tommy amiably. “How do you think I can look for them if
you keep me tied by the leg here?”

“What do you expect, then?”

“I must have liberty to go about the business in my own way.”

The German laughed.

“Do you think we are little children to let you walk out of here leaving
us a pretty story full of promises?”

“No,” said Tommy thoughtfully. “Though infinitely simpler for me, I
did not really think you would agree to that plan. Very well, we must
arrange a compromise. How would it be if you attached little Conrad here
to my person. He’s a faithful fellow, and very ready with the fist.”

“We prefer,” said the German coldly, “that you should remain here.
One of our number will carry out your instructions minutely. If the
operations are complicated, he will return to you with a report and you
can instruct him further.”

“You’re tying my hands,” complained Tommy. “It’s a very delicate affair,
and the other fellow will muff it up as likely as not, and then where
shall I be? I don’t believe one of you has got an ounce of tact.”

The German rapped the table.

“Those are our terms. Otherwise, death!”

Tommy leaned back wearily.

“I like your style. Curt, but attractive. So be it, then. But one thing
is essential, I must see the girl.”

“What girl?”

“Jane Finn, of course.”

The other looked at him curiously for some minutes, then he said slowly,
and as though choosing his words with care:

“Do you not know that she can tell you nothing?”

Tommy’s heart beat a little faster. Would he succeed in coming face to
face with the girl he was seeking?

“I shall not ask her to tell me anything,” he said quietly. “Not in so
many words, that is.”

“Then why see her?”

Tommy paused.

“To watch her face when I ask her one question,” he replied at last.

Again there was a look in the German’s eyes that Tommy did not quite
understand.

“She will not be able to answer your question.”

“That does not matter. I shall have seen her face when I ask it.”

“And you think that will tell you anything?” He gave a short
disagreeable laugh. More than ever, Tommy felt that there was a
factor somewhere that he did not understand. The German looked at
him searchingly. “I wonder whether, after all, you know as much as we
think?” he said softly.

Tommy felt his ascendancy less sure than a moment before. His hold had
slipped a little. But he was puzzled. What had he said wrong? He spoke
out on the impulse of the moment.

“There may be things that you know which I do not. I have not pretended
to be aware of all the details of your show. But equally I’ve got
something up my sleeve that _you_ don’t know about. And that’s where I
mean to score. Danvers was a damned clever fellow----” He broke off as
if he had said too much.

But the German’s face had lightened a little.

“Danvers,” he murmured. “I see----” He paused a minute, then waved to
Conrad. “Take him away. Upstairs--you know.”

“Wait a minute,” said Tommy. “What about the girl?”

“That may perhaps be arranged.”

“It must be.”

“We will see about it. Only one person can decide that.”

“Who?” asked Tommy. But he knew the answer.

“Mr. Brown----”

“Shall I see him?”

“Perhaps.”

“Come,” said Conrad harshly.

Tommy rose obediently. Outside the door his gaoler motioned to him to
mount the stairs. He himself followed close behind. On the floor above
Conrad opened a door and Tommy passed into a small room. Conrad lit a
hissing gas burner and went out. Tommy heard the sound of the key being
turned in the lock.

He set to work to examine his prison. It was a smaller room than the
one downstairs, and there was something peculiarly airless about the
atmosphere of it. Then he realized that there was no window. He walked
round it. The walls were filthily dirty, as everywhere else. Four
pictures hung crookedly on the wall representing scenes from Faust.
Marguerite with her box of jewels, the church scene, Siebel and his
flowers, and Faust and Mephistopheles. The latter brought Tommy’s mind
back to Mr. Brown again. In this sealed and closed chamber, with its
close-fitting heavy door, he felt cut off from the world, and the
sinister power of the arch-criminal seemed more real. Shout as he would,
no one could ever hear him. The place was a living tomb....

With an effort Tommy pulled himself together. He sank on to the bed
and gave himself up to reflection. His head ached badly; also, he was
hungry. The silence of the place was dispiriting.

“Anyway,” said Tommy, trying to cheer himself, “I shall see the
chief--the mysterious Mr. Brown and with a bit of luck in bluffing I
shall see the mysterious Jane Finn also. After that----”

After that Tommy was forced to admit the prospect looked dreary.



CHAPTER XVII. ANNETTE

THE troubles of the future, however, soon faded before the troubles of
the present. And of these, the most immediate and pressing was that of
hunger. Tommy had a healthy and vigorous appetite. The steak and
chips partaken of for lunch seemed now to belong to another decade. He
regretfully recognized the fact that he would not make a success of a
hunger strike.

He prowled aimlessly about his prison. Once or twice he discarded
dignity, and pounded on the door. But nobody answered the summons.

“Hang it all!” said Tommy indignantly. “They can’t mean to starve me
to death.” A new-born fear passed through his mind that this might,
perhaps, be one of those “pretty ways” of making a prisoner speak, which
had been attributed to Boris. But on reflection he dismissed the idea.

“It’s that sour-faced brute Conrad,” he decided. “That’s a fellow I
shall enjoy getting even with one of these days. This is just a bit of
spite on his part. I’m certain of it.”

Further meditations induced in him the feeling that it would be
extremely pleasant to bring something down with a whack on Conrad’s
egg-shaped head. Tommy stroked his own head tenderly, and gave himself
up to the pleasures of imagination. Finally a bright idea flashed
across his brain. Why not convert imagination into reality? Conrad
was undoubtedly the tenant of the house. The others, with the possible
exception of the bearded German, merely used it as a rendezvous.
Therefore, why not wait in ambush for Conrad behind the door, and when
he entered bring down a chair, or one of the decrepit pictures, smartly
on to his head. One would, of course, be careful not to hit too hard.
And then--and then, simply walk out! If he met anyone on the way down,
well---- Tommy brightened at the thought of an encounter with his fists.
Such an affair was infinitely more in his line than the verbal encounter
of this afternoon. Intoxicated by his plan, Tommy gently unhooked the
picture of the Devil and Faust, and settled himself in position. His
hopes were high. The plan seemed to him simple but excellent.

Time went on, but Conrad did not appear. Night and day were the same
in this prison room, but Tommy’s wrist-watch, which enjoyed a certain
degree of accuracy, informed him that it was nine o’clock in the
evening. Tommy reflected gloomily that if supper did not arrive soon
it would be a question of waiting for breakfast. At ten o’clock hope
deserted him, and he flung himself on the bed to seek consolation in
sleep. In five minutes his woes were forgotten.

The sound of the key turning in the lock awoke him from his slumbers.
Not belonging to the type of hero who is famous for awaking in full
possession of his faculties, Tommy merely blinked at the ceiling and
wondered vaguely where he was. Then he remembered, and looked at his
watch. It was eight o’clock.

“It’s either early morning tea or breakfast,” deduced the young man,
“and pray God it’s the latter!”

The door swung open. Too late, Tommy remembered his scheme of
obliterating the unprepossessing Conrad. A moment later he was glad that
he had, for it was not Conrad who entered, but a girl. She carried a
tray which she set down on the table.

In the feeble light of the gas burner Tommy blinked at her. He decided
at once that she was one of the most beautiful girls he had ever seen.
Her hair was a full rich brown, with sudden glints of gold in it as
though there were imprisoned sunbeams struggling in its depths. There
was a wild-rose quality about her face. Her eyes, set wide apart, were
hazel, a golden hazel that again recalled a memory of sunbeams.

A delirious thought shot through Tommy’s mind.

“Are you Jane Finn?” he asked breathlessly.

The girl shook her head wonderingly.

“My name is Annette, monsieur.”

She spoke in a soft, broken English.

“Oh!” said Tommy, rather taken aback. _“Française?”_ he hazarded.

“Oui, monsieur. Monsieur parle français?”

“Not for any length of time,” said Tommy. “What’s that? Breakfast?”

The girl nodded. Tommy dropped off the bed and came and inspected the
contents of the tray. It consisted of a loaf, some margarine, and a jug
of coffee.

“The living is not equal to the _Ritz_,” he observed with a sigh. “But
for what we are at last about to receive the Lord has made me truly
thankful. Amen.”

He drew up a chair, and the girl turned away to the door.

“Wait a sec,” cried Tommy. “There are lots of things I want to ask you,
Annette. What are you doing in this house? Don’t tell me you’re Conrad’s
niece, or daughter, or anything, because I can’t believe it.”

“I do the _service_, monsieur. I am not related to anybody.”

“I see,” said Tommy. “You know what I asked you just now. Have you ever
heard that name?”

“I have heard people speak of Jane Finn, I think.”

“You don’t know where she is?”

Annette shook her head.

“She’s not in this house, for instance?”

“Oh no, monsieur. I must go now--they will be waiting for me.”

She hurried out. The key turned in the lock.

“I wonder who ‘they’ are,” mused Tommy, as he continued to make inroads
on the loaf. “With a bit of luck, that girl might help me to get out of
here. She doesn’t look like one of the gang.”

At one o’clock Annette reappeared with another tray, but this time
Conrad accompanied her.

“Good morning,” said Tommy amiably. “You have _not_ used Pear’s soap, I
see.”

Conrad growled threateningly.

“No light repartee, have you, old bean? There, there, we can’t always
have brains as well as beauty. What have we for lunch? Stew? How did I
know? Elementary, my dear Watson--the smell of onions is unmistakable.”

“Talk away,” grunted the man. “It’s little enough time you’ll have to
talk in, maybe.”

The remark was unpleasant in its suggestion, but Tommy ignored it. He
sat down at the table.

“Retire, varlet,” he said, with a wave of his hand. “Prate not to thy
betters.”

That evening Tommy sat on the bed, and cogitated deeply. Would Conrad
again accompany the girl? If he did not, should he risk trying to make
an ally of her? He decided that he must leave no stone unturned. His
position was desperate.

At eight o’clock the familiar sound of the key turning made him spring
to his feet. The girl was alone.

“Shut the door,” he commanded. “I want to speak to you.” She obeyed.

“Look here, Annette, I want you to help me get out of this.” She shook
her head.

“Impossible. There are three of them on the floor below.”

“Oh!” Tommy was secretly grateful for the information. “But you would
help me if you could?”

“No, monsieur.”

“Why not?”

The girl hesitated.

“I think--they are my own people. You have spied upon them. They are
quite right to keep you here.”

“They’re a bad lot, Annette. If you’ll help me, I’ll take you away from
the lot of them. And you’d probably get a good whack of money.”

But the girl merely shook her head.

“I dare not, monsieur; I am afraid of them.”

She turned away.

“Wouldn’t you do anything to help another girl?” cried Tommy. “She’s
about your age too. Won’t you save her from their clutches?”

“You mean Jane Finn?”

“Yes.”

“It is her you came here to look for? Yes?”

“That’s it.”

The girl looked at him, then passed her hand across her forehead.

“Jane Finn. Always I hear that name. It is familiar.”

Tommy came forward eagerly.

“You must know _something_ about her?”

But the girl turned away abruptly.

“I know nothing--only the name.” She walked towards the door. Suddenly
she uttered a cry. Tommy stared. She had caught sight of the picture
he had laid against the wall the night before. For a moment he caught a
look of terror in her eyes. As inexplicably it changed to relief. Then
abruptly she went out of the room. Tommy could make nothing of it. Did
she fancy that he had meant to attack her with it? Surely not. He rehung
the picture on the wall thoughtfully.

Three more days went by in dreary inaction. Tommy felt the strain
telling on his nerves. He saw no one but Conrad and Annette, and the
girl had become dumb. She spoke only in monosyllables. A kind of dark
suspicion smouldered in her eyes. Tommy felt that if this solitary
confinement went on much longer he would go mad. He gathered from Conrad
that they were waiting for orders from “Mr. Brown.” Perhaps, thought
Tommy, he was abroad or away, and they were obliged to wait for his
return.

But the evening of the third day brought a rude awakening.

It was barely seven o’clock when he heard the tramp of footsteps outside
in the passage. In another minute the door was flung open. Conrad
entered. With him was the evil-looking Number 14. Tommy’s heart sank at
the sight of them.

“Evenin’, gov’nor,” said the man with a leer. “Got those ropes, mate?”

The silent Conrad produced a length of fine cord. The next minute Number
14’s hands, horribly dexterous, were winding the cord round his limbs,
while Conrad held him down.

“What the devil----?” began Tommy.

But the slow, speechless grin of the silent Conrad froze the words on
his lips.

Number 14 proceeded deftly with his task. In another minute Tommy was a
mere helpless bundle. Then at last Conrad spoke:

“Thought you’d bluffed us, did you? With what you knew, and what you
didn’t know. Bargained with us! And all the time it was bluff! Bluff!
You know less than a kitten. But your number’s up now all right, you
b---- swine.”

Tommy lay silent. There was nothing to say. He had failed. Somehow
or other the omnipotent Mr. Brown had seen through his pretensions.
Suddenly a thought occurred to him.

“A very good speech, Conrad,” he said approvingly. “But wherefore the
bonds and fetters? Why not let this kind gentleman here cut my throat
without delay?”

“Garn,” said Number 14 unexpectedly. “Think we’re as green as to do you
in here, and have the police nosing round? Not ‘alf! We’ve ordered the
carriage for your lordship to-morrow mornin’, but in the meantime we’re
not taking any chances, see!”

“Nothing,” said Tommy, “could be plainer than your words--unless it was
your face.”

“Stow it,” said Number 14.

“With pleasure,” replied Tommy. “You’re making a sad mistake--but yours
will be the loss.”

“You don’t kid us that way again,” said Number 14. “Talking as though
you were still at the blooming _Ritz_, aren’t you?”

Tommy made no reply. He was engaged in wondering how Mr. Brown had
discovered his identity. He decided that Tuppence, in the throes of
anxiety, had gone to the police, and that his disappearance having been
made public the gang had not been slow to put two and two together.

The two men departed and the door slammed. Tommy was left to his
meditations. They were not pleasant ones. Already his limbs felt cramped
and stiff. He was utterly helpless, and he could see no hope anywhere.

About an hour had passed when he heard the key softly turned, and the
door opened. It was Annette. Tommy’s heart beat a little faster. He had
forgotten the girl. Was it possible that she had come to his help?

Suddenly he heard Conrad’s voice:

“Come out of it, Annette. He doesn’t want any supper to-night.”

“Oui, oui, je sais bien. But I must take the other tray. We need the
things on it.”

“Well, hurry up,” growled Conrad.

Without looking at Tommy the girl went over to the table, and picked up
the tray. She raised a hand and turned out the light.

“Curse you”--Conrad had come to the door--“why did you do that?”

“I always turn it out. You should have told me. Shall I relight it,
Monsieur Conrad?”

“No, come on out of it.”

“Le beau petit monsieur,” cried Annette, pausing by the bed in the
darkness. “You have tied him up well, _hein?_ He is like a trussed
chicken!” The frank amusement in her tone jarred on the boy; but at
that moment, to his amazement, he felt her hand running lightly over
his bonds, and something small and cold was pressed into the palm of his
hand.

“Come on, Annette.”

“Mais me voilà.”

The door shut. Tommy heard Conrad say:

“Lock it and give me the key.”

The footsteps died away. Tommy lay petrified with amazement. The object
Annette had thrust into his hand was a small penknife, the blade open.
From the way she had studiously avoided looking at him, and her action
with the light, he came to the conclusion that the room was overlooked.
There must be a peep-hole somewhere in the walls. Remembering how
guarded she had always been in her manner, he saw that he had probably
been under observation all the time. Had he said anything to give
himself away? Hardly. He had revealed a wish to escape and a desire
to find Jane Finn, but nothing that could have given a clue to his
own identity. True, his question to Annette had proved that he was
personally unacquainted with Jane Finn, but he had never pretended
otherwise. The question now was, did Annette really know more? Were her
denials intended primarily for the listeners? On that point he could
come to no conclusion.

But there was a more vital question that drove out all others. Could he,
bound as he was, manage to cut his bonds? He essayed cautiously to
rub the open blade up and down on the cord that bound his two wrists
together. It was an awkward business, and drew a smothered “Ow” of pain
from him as the knife cut into his wrist. But slowly and doggedly he
went on sawing to and fro. He cut the flesh badly, but at last he felt
the cord slacken. With his hands free, the rest was easy. Five minutes
later he stood upright with some difficulty, owing to the cramp in his
limbs. His first care was to bind up his bleeding wrist. Then he sat on
the edge of the bed to think. Conrad had taken the key of the door, so
he could expect little more assistance from Annette. The only outlet
from the room was the door, consequently he would perforce have to wait
until the two men returned to fetch him. But when they did.... Tommy
smiled! Moving with infinite caution in the dark room, he found and
unhooked the famous picture. He felt an economical pleasure that his
first plan would not be wasted. There was now nothing to do but to wait.
He waited.

The night passed slowly. Tommy lived through an eternity of hours, but
at last he heard footsteps. He stood upright, drew a deep breath, and
clutched the picture firmly.

The door opened. A faint light streamed in from outside. Conrad went
straight towards the gas to light it. Tommy deeply regretted that it was
he who had entered first. It would have been pleasant to get even with
Conrad. Number 14 followed. As he stepped across the threshold, Tommy
brought the picture down with terrific force on his head. Number 14 went
down amidst a stupendous crash of broken glass. In a minute Tommy had
slipped out and pulled to the door. The key was in the lock. He turned
it and withdrew it just as Conrad hurled himself against the door from
the inside with a volley of curses.

For a moment Tommy hesitated. There was the sound of some one stirring
on the floor below. Then the German’s voice came up the stairs.

“Gott im Himmel! Conrad, what is it?”

Tommy felt a small hand thrust into his. Beside him stood Annette. She
pointed up a rickety ladder that apparently led to some attics.

“Quick--up here!” She dragged him after her up the ladder. In another
moment they were standing in a dusty garret littered with lumber. Tommy
looked round.

“This won’t do. It’s a regular trap. There’s no way out.”

“Hush! Wait.” The girl put her finger to her lips. She crept to the top
of the ladder and listened.

The banging and beating on the door was terrific. The German and another
were trying to force the door in. Annette explained in a whisper:

“They will think you are still inside. They cannot hear what Conrad
says. The door is too thick.”

“I thought you could hear what went on in the room?”

“There is a peep-hole into the next room. It was clever of you to guess.
But they will not think of that--they are only anxious to get in.”

“Yes--but look here----”

“Leave it to me.” She bent down. To his amazement, Tommy saw that she
was fastening the end of a long piece of string to the handle of a big
cracked jug. She arranged it carefully, then turned to Tommy.

“Have you the key of the door?”

“Yes.”

“Give it to me.”

He handed it to her.

“I am going down. Do you think you can go halfway, and then swing
yourself down _behind_ the ladder, so that they will not see you?”

Tommy nodded.

“There’s a big cupboard in the shadow of the landing. Stand behind it.
Take the end of this string in your hand. When I’ve let the others out--
_pull! _”

Before he had time to ask her anything more, she had flitted lightly
down the ladder and was in the midst of the group with a loud cry:

“Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Qu’est-ce qu’il y a?”

The German turned on her with an oath.

“Get out of this. Go to your room!”

Very cautiously Tommy swung himself down the back of the ladder. So
long as they did not turn round ... all was well. He crouched behind the
cupboard. They were still between him and the stairs.

“Ah!” Annette appeared to stumble over something. She stooped. “Mon
Dieu, voilà la clef!”

The German snatched it from her. He unlocked the door. Conrad stumbled
out, swearing.

“Where is he? Have you got him?”

“We have seen no one,” said the German sharply. His face paled. “Who do
you mean?”

Conrad gave vent to another oath.

“He’s got away.”

“Impossible. He would have passed us.”

At that moment, with an ecstatic smile Tommy pulled the string. A crash
of crockery came from the attic above. In a trice the men were pushing
each other up the rickety ladder and had disappeared into the darkness
above.

Quick as a flash Tommy leapt from his hiding-place and dashed down the
stairs, pulling the girl with him. There was no one in the hall. He
fumbled over the bolts and chain. At last they yielded, the door swung
open. He turned. Annette had disappeared.

Tommy stood spell-bound. Had she run upstairs again? What madness
possessed her! He fumed with impatience, but he stood his ground. He
would not go without her.

And suddenly there was an outcry overhead, an exclamation from the
German, and then Annette’s voice, clear and high:

“Ma foi, he has escaped! And quickly! Who would have thought it?”

Tommy still stood rooted to the ground. Was that a command to him to go?
He fancied it was.

And then, louder still, the words floated down to him:

“This is a terrible house. I want to go back to Marguerite. To
Marguerite. _To Marguerite!_”

Tommy had run back to the stairs. She wanted him to go and leave her.
But why? At all costs he must try and get her away with him. Then his
heart sank. Conrad was leaping down the stairs, uttering a savage cry at
the sight of him. After him came the others.

Tommy stopped Conrad’s rush with a straight blow with his fist. It
caught the other on the point of the jaw and he fell like a log. The
second man tripped over his body and fell. From higher up the staircase
there was a flash, and a bullet grazed Tommy’s ear. He realized that
it would be good for his health to get out of this house as soon as
possible. As regards Annette he could do nothing. He had got even with
Conrad, which was one satisfaction. The blow had been a good one.

He leapt for the door, slamming it behind him. The square was deserted.
In front of the house was a baker’s van. Evidently he was to have been
taken out of London in that, and his body found many miles from the
house in Soho. The driver jumped to the pavement and tried to bar
Tommy’s way. Again Tommy’s fist shot out, and the driver sprawled on the
pavement.

Tommy took to his heels and ran--none too soon. The front door opened
and a hail of bullets followed him. Fortunately none of them hit him. He
turned the corner of the square.

“There’s one thing,” he thought to himself, “they can’t go on shooting.
They’ll have the police after them if they do. I wonder they dared to
there.”

He heard the footsteps of his pursuers behind him, and redoubled his own
pace. Once he got out of these by-ways he would be safe. There would be
a policeman about somewhere--not that he really wanted to invoke the aid
of the police if he could possibly do without it. It meant explanations,
and general awkwardness. In another moment he had reason to bless his
luck. He stumbled over a prostrate figure, which started up with a yell
of alarm and dashed off down the street. Tommy drew back into a doorway.
In a minute he had the pleasure of seeing his two pursuers, of whom the
German was one, industriously tracking down the red herring!

Tommy sat down quietly on the doorstep and allowed a few moments to
elapse while he recovered his breath. Then he strolled gently in the
opposite direction. He glanced at his watch. It was a little after
half-past five. It was rapidly growing light. At the next corner he
passed a policeman. The policeman cast a suspicious eye on him. Tommy
felt slightly offended. Then, passing his hand over his face, he
laughed. He had not shaved or washed for three days! What a guy he must
look.

He betook himself without more ado to a Turkish Bath establishment which
he knew to be open all night. He emerged into the busy daylight feeling
himself once more, and able to make plans.

First of all, he must have a square meal. He had eaten nothing since
midday yesterday. He turned into an A.B.C. shop and ordered eggs and
bacon and coffee. Whilst he ate, he read a morning paper propped up
in front of him. Suddenly he stiffened. There was a long article on
Kramenin, who was described as the “man behind Bolshevism” in Russia,
and who had just arrived in London--some thought as an unofficial envoy.
His career was sketched lightly, and it was firmly asserted that he,
and not the figurehead leaders, had been the author of the Russian
Revolution.

In the centre of the page was his portrait.

“So that’s who Number 1 is,” said Tommy with his mouth full of eggs and
bacon. “Not a doubt about it, I must push on.”

He paid for his breakfast, and betook himself to Whitehall. There he
sent up his name, and the message that it was urgent. A few minutes
later he was in the presence of the man who did not here go by the name
of “Mr. Carter.” There was a frown on his face.

“Look here, you’ve no business to come asking for me in this way. I
thought that was distinctly understood?”

“It was, sir. But I judged it important to lose no time.”

And as briefly and succinctly as possible he detailed the experiences of
the last few days.

Half-way through, Mr. Carter interrupted him to give a few cryptic
orders through the telephone. All traces of displeasure had now left his
face. He nodded energetically when Tommy had finished.

“Quite right. Every moment’s of value. Fear we shall be too late anyway.
They wouldn’t wait. Would clear out at once. Still, they may have left
something behind them that will be a clue. You say you’ve recognized
Number 1 to be Kramenin? That’s important. We want something against him
badly to prevent the Cabinet falling on his neck too freely. What about
the others? You say two faces were familiar to you? One’s a Labour man,
you think? Just look through these photos, and see if you can spot him.”

A minute later, Tommy held one up. Mr. Carter exhibited some surprise.

“Ah, Westway! Shouldn’t have thought it. Poses as being moderate. As for
the other fellow, I think I can give a good guess.” He handed another
photograph to Tommy, and smiled at the other’s exclamation. “I’m right,
then. Who is he? Irishman. Prominent Unionist M.P. All a blind, of
course. We’ve suspected it--but couldn’t get any proof. Yes, you’ve done
very well, young man. The 29th, you say, is the date. That gives us very
little time--very little time indeed.”

“But----” Tommy hesitated.

Mr. Carter read his thoughts.

“We can deal with the General Strike menace, I think. It’s a
toss-up--but we’ve got a sporting chance! But if that draft treaty turns
up--we’re done. England will be plunged in anarchy. Ah, what’s that?
The car? Come on, Beresford, we’ll go and have a look at this house of
yours.”

Two constables were on duty in front of the house in Soho. An inspector
reported to Mr. Carter in a low voice. The latter turned to Tommy.

“The birds have flown--as we thought. We might as well go over it.”

Going over the deserted house seemed to Tommy to partake of the
character of a dream. Everything was just as it had been. The prison
room with the crooked pictures, the broken jug in the attic, the meeting
room with its long table. But nowhere was there a trace of papers.
Everything of that kind had either been destroyed or taken away. And
there was no sign of Annette.

“What you tell me about the girl puzzled me,” said Mr. Carter. “You
believe that she deliberately went back?”

“It would seem so, sir. She ran upstairs while I was getting the door
open.”

“H’m, she must belong to the gang, then; but, being a woman, didn’t feel
like standing by to see a personable young man killed. But evidently
she’s in with them, or she wouldn’t have gone back.”

“I can’t believe she’s really one of them, sir. She--seemed so
different----”

“Good-looking, I suppose?” said Mr. Carter with a smile that made Tommy
flush to the roots of his hair. He admitted Annette’s beauty rather
shamefacedly.

“By the way,” observed Mr. Carter, “have you shown yourself to Miss
Tuppence yet? She’s been bombarding me with letters about you.”

“Tuppence? I was afraid she might get a bit rattled. Did she go to the
police?”

Mr. Carter shook his head.

“Then I wonder how they twigged me.”

Mr. Carter looked inquiringly at him, and Tommy explained. The other
nodded thoughtfully.

“True, that’s rather a curious point. Unless the mention of the _Ritz_
was an accidental remark?”

“It might have been, sir. But they must have found out about me suddenly
in some way.”

“Well,” said Mr. Carter, looking round him, “there’s nothing more to be
done here. What about some lunch with me?”

“Thanks awfully, sir. But I think I’d better get back and rout out
Tuppence.”

“Of course. Give her my kind regards and tell her not to believe you’re
killed too readily next time.”

Tommy grinned.

“I take a lot of killing, sir.”

“So I perceive,” said Mr. Carter dryly. “Well, good-bye. Remember you’re
a marked man now, and take reasonable care of yourself.”

“Thank you, sir.”

Hailing a taxi briskly Tommy stepped in, and was swiftly borne to the
_Ritz_, dwelling the while on the pleasurable anticipation of startling
Tuppence.

“Wonder what she’s been up to. Dogging ‘Rita’ most likely. By the way,
I suppose that’s who Annette meant by Marguerite. I didn’t get it at the
time.” The thought saddened him a little, for it seemed to prove that
Mrs. Vandemeyer and the girl were on intimate terms.

The taxi drew up at the _Ritz_. Tommy burst into its sacred portals
eagerly, but his enthusiasm received a check. He was informed that Miss
Cowley had gone out a quarter of an hour ago.



CHAPTER XVIII. THE TELEGRAM

BAFFLED for the moment, Tommy strolled into the restaurant, and ordered
a meal of surpassing excellence. His four days’ imprisonment had taught
him anew to value good food.

He was in the middle of conveying a particularly choice morsel of Sole
à la Jeanette to his mouth, when he caught sight of Julius entering
the room. Tommy waved a menu cheerfully, and succeeded in attracting the
other’s attention. At the sight of Tommy, Julius’s eyes seemed as though
they would pop out of his head. He strode across, and pump-handled
Tommy’s hand with what seemed to the latter quite unnecessary vigour.

“Holy snakes!” he ejaculated. “Is it really you?”

“Of course it is. Why shouldn’t it be?”

“Why shouldn’t it be? Say, man, don’t you know you’ve been given up
for dead? I guess we’d have had a solemn requiem for you in another few
days.”

“Who thought I was dead?” demanded Tommy.

“Tuppence.”

“She remembered the proverb about the good dying young, I suppose. There
must be a certain amount of original sin in me to have survived. Where
is Tuppence, by the way?”

“Isn’t she here?”

“No, the fellows at the office said she’d just gone out.”

“Gone shopping, I guess. I dropped her here in the car about an hour
ago. But, say, can’t you shed that British calm of yours, and get down
to it? What on God’s earth have you been doing all this time?”

“If you’re feeding here,” replied Tommy, “order now. It’s going to be a
long story.”

Julius drew up a chair to the opposite side of the table, summoned a
hovering waiter, and dictated his wishes. Then he turned to Tommy.

“Fire ahead. I guess you’ve had some few adventures.”

“One or two,” replied Tommy modestly, and plunged into his recital.

Julius listened spellbound. Half the dishes that were placed before him
he forgot to eat. At the end he heaved a long sigh.

“Bully for you. Reads like a dime novel!”

“And now for the home front,” said Tommy, stretching out his hand for a
peach.

“We-el,” drawled Julius, “I don’t mind admitting we’ve had some
adventures too.”

He, in his turn, assumed the rôle of narrator. Beginning with his
unsuccessful reconnoitring at Bournemouth, he passed on to his return
to London, the buying of the car, the growing anxieties of Tuppence,
the call upon Sir James, and the sensational occurrences of the previous
night.

“But who killed her?” asked Tommy. “I don’t quite understand.”

“The doctor kidded himself she took it herself,” replied Julius dryly.

“And Sir James? What did he think?”

“Being a legal luminary, he is likewise a human oyster,” replied Julius.
“I should say he ‘reserved judgment.’” He went on to detail the events
of the morning.

“Lost her memory, eh?” said Tommy with interest. “By Jove, that explains
why they looked at me so queerly when I spoke of questioning her. Bit of
a slip on my part, that! But it wasn’t the sort of thing a fellow would
be likely to guess.”

“They didn’t give you any sort of hint as to where Jane was?”

Tommy shook his head regretfully.

“Not a word. I’m a bit of an ass, as you know. I ought to have got more
out of them somehow.”

“I guess you’re lucky to be here at all. That bluff of yours was the
goods all right. How you ever came to think of it all so pat beats me to
a frazzle!”

“I was in such a funk I had to think of something,” said Tommy simply.

There was a moment’s pause, and then Tommy reverted to Mrs. Vandemeyer’s
death.

“There’s no doubt it was chloral?”

“I believe not. At least they call it heart failure induced by an
overdose, or some such claptrap. It’s all right. We don’t want to
be worried with an inquest. But I guess Tuppence and I and even the
highbrow Sir James have all got the same idea.”

“Mr. Brown?” hazarded Tommy.

“Sure thing.”

Tommy nodded.

“All the same,” he said thoughtfully, “Mr. Brown hasn’t got wings. I
don’t see how he got in and out.”

“How about some high-class thought transference stunt? Some magnetic
influence that irresistibly impelled Mrs. Vandemeyer to commit suicide?”

Tommy looked at him with respect.

“Good, Julius. Distinctly good. Especially the phraseology. But it
leaves me cold. I yearn for a real Mr. Brown of flesh and blood. I think
the gifted young detectives must get to work, study the entrances and
exits, and tap the bumps on their foreheads until the solution of the
mystery dawns on them. Let’s go round to the scene of the crime. I wish
we could get hold of Tuppence. The _Ritz_ would enjoy the spectacle of
the glad reunion.”

Inquiry at the office revealed the fact that Tuppence had not yet
returned.

“All the same, I guess I’ll have a look round upstairs,” said Julius.
“She might be in my sitting-room.” He disappeared.

Suddenly a diminutive boy spoke at Tommy’s elbow:

“The young lady--she’s gone away by train, I think, sir,” he murmured
shyly.

“What?” Tommy wheeled round upon him.

The small boy became pinker than before.

“The taxi, sir. I heard her tell the driver Charing Cross and to look
sharp.”

Tommy stared at him, his eyes opening wide in surprise. Emboldened, the
small boy proceeded. “So I thought, having asked for an A.B.C. and a
Bradshaw.”

Tommy interrupted him:

“When did she ask for an A.B.C. and a Bradshaw?”

“When I took her the telegram, sir.”

“A telegram?”

“Yes, sir.”

“When was that?”

“About half-past twelve, sir.”

“Tell me exactly what happened.”

The small boy drew a long breath.

“I took up a telegram to No. 891--the lady was there. She opened it
and gave a gasp, and then she said, very jolly like: ‘Bring me up a
Bradshaw, and an A.B.C., and look sharp, Henry.’ My name isn’t Henry,
but----”

“Never mind your name,” said Tommy impatiently. “Go on.”

“Yes, sir. I brought them, and she told me to wait, and looked up
something. And then she looks up at the clock, and ‘Hurry up,’ she says.
‘Tell them to get me a taxi,’ and she begins a-shoving on of her hat in
front of the glass, and she was down in two ticks, almost as quick as I
was, and I seed her going down the steps and into the taxi, and I heard
her call out what I told you.”

The small boy stopped and replenished his lungs. Tommy continued to
stare at him. At that moment Julius rejoined him. He held an open letter
in his hand.

“I say, Hersheimmer”--Tommy turned to him--“Tuppence has gone off
sleuthing on her own.”

“Shucks!”

“Yes, she has. She went off in a taxi to Charing Cross in the deuce of a
hurry after getting a telegram.” His eye fell on the letter in Julius’s
hand. “Oh; she left a note for you. That’s all right. Where’s she off
to?”

Almost unconsciously, he held out his hand for the letter, but
Julius folded it up and placed it in his pocket. He seemed a trifle
embarrassed.

“I guess this is nothing to do with it. It’s about something
else--something I asked her that she was to let me know about.”

“Oh!” Tommy looked puzzled, and seemed waiting for more.

“See here,” said Julius suddenly, “I’d better put you wise. I asked Miss
Tuppence to marry me this morning.”

“Oh!” said Tommy mechanically. He felt dazed. Julius’s words were
totally unexpected. For the moment they benumbed his brain.

“I’d like to tell you,” continued Julius, “that before I suggested
anything of the kind to Miss Tuppence, I made it clear that I didn’t
want to butt in in any way between her and you----”

Tommy roused himself.

“That’s all right,” he said quickly. “Tuppence and I have been pals for
years. Nothing more.” He lit a cigarette with a hand that shook ever
so little. “That’s quite all right. Tuppence always said that she was
looking out for----”

He stopped abruptly, his face crimsoning, but Julius was in no way
discomposed.

“Oh, I guess it’ll be the dollars that’ll do the trick. Miss Tuppence
put me wise to that right away. There’s no humbug about her. We ought to
gee along together very well.”

Tommy looked at him curiously for a minute, as though he were about
to speak, then changed his mind and said nothing. Tuppence and Julius!
Well, why not? Had she not lamented the fact that she knew no rich men?
Had she not openly avowed her intention of marrying for money if she
ever had the chance? Her meeting with the young American millionaire
had given her the chance--and it was unlikely she would be slow to avail
herself of it. She was out for money. She had always said so. Why blame
her because she had been true to her creed?

Nevertheless, Tommy did blame her. He was filled with a passionate and
utterly illogical resentment. It was all very well to _say_ things
like that--but a _real_ girl would never marry for money. Tuppence was
utterly cold-blooded and selfish, and he would be delighted if he never
saw her again! And it was a rotten world!

Julius’s voice broke in on these meditations.

“Yes, we ought to gee along together very well. I’ve heard that a girl
always refuses you once--a sort of convention.”

Tommy caught his arm.

“Refuses? Did you say _refuses?_”

“Sure thing. Didn’t I tell you that? She just rapped out a ‘no’ without
any kind of reason to it. The eternal feminine, the Huns call it, I’ve
heard. But she’ll come round right enough. Likely enough, I hustled her
some----”

But Tommy interrupted regardless of decorum.

“What did she say in that note?” he demanded fiercely.

The obliging Julius handed it to him.

“There’s no earthly clue in it as to where she’s gone,” he assured
Tommy. “But you might as well see for yourself if you don’t believe me.”

The note, in Tuppence’s well-known schoolboy writing, ran as follows:

“DEAR JULIUS,

“It’s always better to have things in black and white. I don’t feel I
can be bothered to think of marriage until Tommy is found. Let’s leave
it till then.

“Yours affectionately,

“TUPPENCE.”

Tommy handed it back, his eyes shining. His feelings had undergone a
sharp reaction. He now felt that Tuppence was all that was noble and
disinterested. Had she not refused Julius without hesitation? True, the
note betokened signs of weakening, but he could excuse that. It read
almost like a bribe to Julius to spur him on in his efforts to find
Tommy, but he supposed she had not really meant it that way. Darling
Tuppence, there was not a girl in the world to touch her! When he saw
her----His thoughts were brought up with a sudden jerk.

“As you say,” he remarked, pulling himself together, “there’s not a hint
here as to what she’s up to. Hi--Henry!”

The small boy came obediently. Tommy produced five shillings.

“One thing more. Do you remember what the young lady did with the
telegram?”

Henry gasped and spoke.

“She crumpled it up into a ball and threw it into the grate, and made a
sort of noise like ‘Whoop!’ sir.”

“Very graphic, Henry,” said Tommy. “Here’s your five shillings. Come on,
Julius. We must find that telegram.”

They hurried upstairs. Tuppence had left the key in her door. The room
was as she had left it. In the fireplace was a crumpled ball of orange
and white. Tommy disentangled it and smoothed out the telegram.

“Come at once, Moat House, Ebury, Yorkshire, great developments--TOMMY.”

They looked at each other in stupefaction. Julius spoke first:

“You didn’t send it?”

“Of course not. What does it mean?”

“I guess it means the worst,” said Julius quietly. “They’ve got her.”

_“What?”_

“Sure thing! They signed your name, and she fell into the trap like a
lamb.”

“My God! What shall we do?”

“Get busy, and go after her! Right now! There’s no time to waste. It’s
almighty luck that she didn’t take the wire with her. If she had we’d
probably never have traced her. But we’ve got to hustle. Where’s that
Bradshaw?”

The energy of Julius was infectious. Left to himself, Tommy would
probably have sat down to think things out for a good half-hour before
he decided on a plan of action. But with Julius Hersheimmer about,
hustling was inevitable.

After a few muttered imprecations he handed the Bradshaw to Tommy as
being more conversant with its mysteries. Tommy abandoned it in favour
of an A.B.C.

“Here we are. Ebury, Yorks. From King’s Cross. Or St. Pancras. (Boy must
have made a mistake. It was King’s Cross, not _Charing_ Cross.) 12.50,
that’s the train she went by. 2.10, that’s gone. 3.20 is the next--and a
damned slow train too.”

“What about the car?”

Tommy shook his head.

“Send it up if you like, but we’d better stick to the train. The great
thing is to keep calm.”

Julius groaned.

“That’s so. But it gets my goat to think of that innocent young girl in
danger!”

Tommy nodded abstractedly. He was thinking. In a moment or two, he said:

“I say, Julius, what do they want her for, anyway?”

“Eh? I don’t get you?”

“What I mean is that I don’t think it’s their game to do her any harm,”
 explained Tommy, puckering his brow with the strain of his mental
processes. “She’s a hostage, that’s what she is. She’s in no immediate
danger, because if we tumble on to anything, she’d be damned useful to
them. As long as they’ve got her, they’ve got the whip hand of us. See?”

“Sure thing,” said Julius thoughtfully. “That’s so.”

“Besides,” added Tommy, as an afterthought, “I’ve great faith in
Tuppence.”

The journey was wearisome, with many stops, and crowded carriages. They
had to change twice, once at Doncaster, once at a small junction. Ebury
was a deserted station with a solitary porter, to whom Tommy addressed
himself:

“Can you tell me the way to the Moat House?”

“The Moat House? It’s a tidy step from here. The big house near the sea,
you mean?”

Tommy assented brazenly. After listening to the porter’s meticulous
but perplexing directions, they prepared to leave the station. It was
beginning to rain, and they turned up the collars of their coats as they
trudged through the slush of the road. Suddenly Tommy halted.

“Wait a moment.” He ran back to the station and tackled the porter anew.

“Look here, do you remember a young lady who arrived by an earlier
train, the 12.50 from London? She’d probably ask you the way to the Moat
House.”

He described Tuppence as well as he could, but the porter shook his
head. Several people had arrived by the train in question. He could not
call to mind one young lady in particular. But he was quite certain that
no one had asked him the way to the Moat House.

Tommy rejoined Julius, and explained. Depression was settling on him
like a leaden weight. He felt convinced that their quest was going to
be unsuccessful. The enemy had over three hours’ start. Three hours was
more than enough for Mr. Brown. He would not ignore the possibility of
the telegram having been found.

The way seemed endless. Once they took the wrong turning and went nearly
half a mile out of their direction. It was past seven o’clock when a
small boy told them that “t’ Moat House” was just past the next corner.

A rusty iron gate swinging dismally on its hinges! An overgrown drive
thick with leaves. There was something about the place that struck a
chill to both their hearts. They went up the deserted drive. The leaves
deadened their footsteps. The daylight was almost gone. It was like
walking in a world of ghosts. Overhead the branches flapped and creaked
with a mournful note. Occasionally a sodden leaf drifted silently down,
startling them with its cold touch on their cheek.

A turn of the drive brought them in sight of the house. That, too,
seemed empty and deserted. The shutters were closed, the steps up to
the door overgrown with moss. Was it indeed to this desolate spot
that Tuppence had been decoyed? It seemed hard to believe that a human
footstep had passed this way for months.

Julius jerked the rusty bell handle. A jangling peal rang discordantly,
echoing through the emptiness within. No one came. They rang again and
again--but there was no sign of life. Then they walked completely round
the house. Everywhere silence, and shuttered windows. If they could
believe the evidence of their eyes the place was empty.

“Nothing doing,” said Julius.

They retraced their steps slowly to the gate.

“There must be a village handy,” continued the young American. “We’d
better make inquiries there. They’ll know something about the place, and
whether there’s been anyone there lately.”

“Yes, that’s not a bad idea.”

Proceeding up the road, they soon came to a little hamlet. On the
outskirts of it, they met a workman swinging his bag of tools, and Tommy
stopped him with a question.

“The Moat House? It’s empty. Been empty for years. Mrs. Sweeny’s got the
key if you want to go over it--next to the post office.”

Tommy thanked him. They soon found the post office, which was also a
sweet and general fancy shop, and knocked at the door of the cottage
next to it. A clean, wholesome-looking woman opened it. She readily
produced the key of the Moat House.

“Though I doubt if it’s the kind of place to suit you, sir. In a
terrible state of repair. Ceilings leaking and all. ‘Twould need a lot
of money spent on it.”

“Thanks,” said Tommy cheerily. “I dare say it’ll be a washout, but
houses are scarce nowadays.”

“That they are,” declared the woman heartily. “My daughter and
son-in-law have been looking for a decent cottage for I don’t know how
long. It’s all the war. Upset things terribly, it has. But excuse me,
sir, it’ll be too dark for you to see much of the house. Hadn’t you
better wait until to-morrow?”

“That’s all right. We’ll have a look around this evening, anyway. We’d
have been here before only we lost our way. What’s the best place to
stay at for the night round here?”

Mrs. Sweeny looked doubtful.

“There’s the _Yorkshire Arms_, but it’s not much of a place for
gentlemen like you.”

“Oh, it will do very well. Thanks. By the way, you’ve not had a young
lady here asking for this key to-day?”

The woman shook her head.

“No one’s been over the place for a long time.”

“Thanks very much.”

They retraced their steps to the Moat House. As the front door swung
back on its hinges, protesting loudly, Julius struck a match and
examined the floor carefully. Then he shook his head.

“I’d swear no one’s passed this way. Look at the dust. Thick. Not a sign
of a footmark.”

They wandered round the deserted house. Everywhere the same tale. Thick
layers of dust apparently undisturbed.

“This gets me,” said Julius. “I don’t believe Tuppence was ever in this
house.”

“She must have been.”

Julius shook his head without replying.

“We’ll go over it again to-morrow,” said Tommy. “Perhaps we’ll see more
in the daylight.”

On the morrow they took up the search once more, and were reluctantly
forced to the conclusion that the house had not been invaded for some
considerable time. They might have left the village altogether but for
a fortunate discovery of Tommy’s. As they were retracing their steps to
the gate, he gave a sudden cry, and stooping, picked something up from
among the leaves, and held it out to Julius. It was a small gold brooch.

“That’s Tuppence’s!”

“Are you sure?”

“Absolutely. I’ve often seen her wear it.”

Julius drew a deep breath.

“I guess that settles it. She came as far as here, anyway. We’ll make
that pub our head-quarters, and raise hell round here until we find her.
Somebody _must_ have seen her.”

Forthwith the campaign began. Tommy and Julius worked separately and
together, but the result was the same. Nobody answering to Tuppence’s
description had been seen in the vicinity. They were baffled--but not
discouraged. Finally they altered their tactics. Tuppence had certainly
not remained long in the neighbourhood of the Moat House. That pointed
to her having been overcome and carried away in a car. They renewed
inquiries. Had anyone seen a car standing somewhere near the Moat House
that day? Again they met with no success.

Julius wired to town for his own car, and they scoured the neighbourhood
daily with unflagging zeal. A grey limousine on which they had set high
hopes was traced to Harrogate, and turned out to be the property of a
highly respectable maiden lady!

Each day saw them set out on a new quest. Julius was like a hound on
the leash. He followed up the slenderest clue. Every car that had passed
through the village on the fateful day was tracked down. He forced his
way into country properties and submitted the owners of the motors to
a searching cross-examination. His apologies were as thorough as his
methods, and seldom failed in disarming the indignation of his victims;
but, as day succeeded day, they were no nearer to discovering Tuppence’s
whereabouts. So well had the abduction been planned that the girl seemed
literally to have vanished into thin air.

And another preoccupation was weighing on Tommy’s mind.

“Do you know how long we’ve been here?” he asked one morning as they
sat facing each other at breakfast. “A week! We’re no nearer to finding
Tuppence, _and next Sunday is the_ 29_th!_”

“Shucks!” said Julius thoughtfully. “I’d almost forgotten about the
29th. I’ve been thinking of nothing but Tuppence.”

“So have I. At least, I hadn’t forgotten about the 29th, but it didn’t
seem to matter a damn in comparison to finding Tuppence. But to-day’s
the 23rd, and time’s getting short. If we’re ever going to get hold of
her at all, we must do it before the 29th--her life won’t be worth an
hour’s purchase afterwards. The hostage game will be played out by then.
I’m beginning to feel that we’ve made a big mistake in the way we’ve set
about this. We’ve wasted time and we’re no forrader.”

“I’m with you there. We’ve been a couple of mutts, who’ve bitten off a
bigger bit than they can chew. I’m going to quit fooling right away!”

“What do you mean?”

“I’ll tell you. I’m going to do what we ought to have done a week ago.
I’m going right back to London to put the case in the hands of your
British police. We fancied ourselves as sleuths. Sleuths! It was a piece
of damn-fool foolishness! I’m through! I’ve had enough of it. Scotland
Yard for me!”

“You’re right,” said Tommy slowly. “I wish to God we’d gone there right
away.”

“Better late than never. We’ve been like a couple of babes playing ‘Here
we go round the Mulberry Bush.’ Now I’m going right along to Scotland
Yard to ask them to take me by the hand and show me the way I should go.
I guess the professional always scores over the amateur in the end. Are
you coming along with me?”

Tommy shook his head.

“What’s the good? One of us is enough. I might as well stay here and
nose round a bit longer. Something _might_ turn up. One never knows.”

“Sure thing. Well, so long. I’ll be back in a couple of shakes with a
few inspectors along. I shall tell them to pick out their brightest and
best.”

But the course of events was not to follow the plan Julius had laid
down. Later in the day Tommy received a wire:

“Join me Manchester Midland Hotel. Important news--JULIUS.”

At 7.30 that night Tommy alighted from a slow cross-country train.
Julius was on the platform.

“Thought you’d come by this train if you weren’t out when my wire
arrived.”

Tommy grasped him by the arm.

“What is it? Is Tuppence found?”

Julius shook his head.

“No. But I found this waiting in London. Just arrived.”

He handed the telegraph form to the other. Tommy’s eyes opened as he
read:

“Jane Finn found. Come Manchester Midland Hotel immediately--PEEL
EDGERTON.”

Julius took the form back and folded it up.

“Queer,” he said thoughtfully. “I thought that lawyer chap had quit!”



CHAPTER XIX. JANE FINN

“MY train got in half an hour ago,” explained Julius, as he led the way
out of the station. “I reckoned you’d come by this before I left London,
and wired accordingly to Sir James. He’s booked rooms for us, and will
be round to dine at eight.”

“What made you think he’d ceased to take any interest in the case?”
 asked Tommy curiously.

“What he said,” replied Julius dryly. “The old bird’s as close as an
oyster! Like all the darned lot of them, he wasn’t going to commit
himself till he was sure he could deliver the goods.”

“I wonder,” said Tommy thoughtfully.

Julius turned on him.

“You wonder what?”

“Whether that was his real reason.”

“Sure. You bet your life it was.”

Tommy shook his head unconvinced.

Sir James arrived punctually at eight o’clock, and Julius introduced
Tommy. Sir James shook hands with him warmly.

“I am delighted to make your acquaintance, Mr. Beresford. I have heard
so much about you from Miss Tuppence”--he smiled involuntarily--“that it
really seems as though I already know you quite well.”

“Thank you, sir,” said Tommy with his cheerful grin. He scanned the
great lawyer eagerly. Like Tuppence, he felt the magnetism of the
other’s personality. He was reminded of Mr. Carter. The two men, totally
unlike so far as physical resemblance went, produced a similar effect.
Beneath the weary manner of the one and the professional reserve of the
other, lay the same quality of mind, keen-edged like a rapier.

In the meantime he was conscious of Sir James’s close scrutiny. When the
lawyer dropped his eyes the young man had the feeling that the other had
read him through and through like an open book. He could not but wonder
what the final judgment was, but there was little chance of learning
that. Sir James took in everything, but gave out only what he chose. A
proof of that occurred almost at once.

Immediately the first greetings were over Julius broke out into a flood
of eager questions. How had Sir James managed to track the girl? Why had
he not let them know that he was still working on the case? And so on.

Sir James stroked his chin and smiled. At last he said:

“Just so, just so. Well, she’s found. And that’s the great thing, isn’t
it? Eh! Come now, that’s the great thing?”

“Sure it is. But just how did you strike her trail? Miss Tuppence and I
thought you’d quit for good and all.”

“Ah!” The lawyer shot a lightning glance at him, then resumed operations
on his chin. “You thought that, did you? Did you really? H’m, dear me.”

“But I guess I can take it we were wrong,” pursued Julius.

“Well, I don’t know that I should go so far as to say that. But it’s
certainly fortunate for all parties that we’ve managed to find the young
lady.”

“But where is she?” demanded Julius, his thoughts flying off on another
tack. “I thought you’d be sure to bring her along?”

“That would hardly be possible,” said Sir James gravely.

“Why?”

“Because the young lady was knocked down in a street accident, and has
sustained slight injuries to the head. She was taken to the infirmary,
and on recovering consciousness gave her name as Jane Finn. When--ah!--I
heard that, I arranged for her to be removed to the house of a
doctor--a friend of mine, and wired at once for you. She relapsed into
unconsciousness and has not spoken since.”

“She’s not seriously hurt?”

“Oh, a bruise and a cut or two; really, from a medical point of view,
absurdly slight injuries to have produced such a condition. Her state is
probably to be attributed to the mental shock consequent on recovering
her memory.”

“It’s come back?” cried Julius excitedly.

Sir James tapped the table rather impatiently.

“Undoubtedly, Mr. Hersheimmer, since she was able to give her real name.
I thought you had appreciated that point.”

“And you just happened to be on the spot,” said Tommy. “Seems quite like
a fairy tale.”

But Sir James was far too wary to be drawn.

“Coincidences are curious things,” he said dryly.

Nevertheless Tommy was now certain of what he had before only suspected.
Sir James’s presence in Manchester was not accidental. Far from
abandoning the case, as Julius supposed, he had by some means of his own
successfully run the missing girl to earth. The only thing that puzzled
Tommy was the reason for all this secrecy. He concluded that it was a
foible of the legal mind.

Julius was speaking.

“After dinner,” he announced, “I shall go right away and see Jane.”

“That will be impossible, I fear,” said Sir James. “It is very unlikely
they would allow her to see visitors at this time of night. I should
suggest to-morrow morning about ten o’clock.”

Julius flushed. There was something in Sir James which always stirred
him to antagonism. It was a conflict of two masterful personalities.

“All the same, I reckon I’ll go round there to-night and see if I can’t
ginger them up to break through their silly rules.”

“It will be quite useless, Mr. Hersheimmer.”

The words came out like the crack of a pistol, and Tommy looked up with
a start. Julius was nervous and excited. The hand with which he raised
his glass to his lips shook slightly, but his eyes held Sir James’s
defiantly. For a moment the hostility between the two seemed likely to
burst into flame, but in the end Julius lowered his eyes, defeated.

“For the moment, I reckon you’re the boss.”

“Thank you,” said the other. “We will say ten o’clock then?” With
consummate ease of manner he turned to Tommy. “I must confess, Mr.
Beresford, that it was something of a surprise to me to see you here
this evening. The last I heard of you was that your friends were in
grave anxiety on your behalf. Nothing had been heard of you for
some days, and Miss Tuppence was inclined to think you had got into
difficulties.”

“I had, sir!” Tommy grinned reminiscently. “I was never in a tighter
place in my life.”

Helped out by questions from Sir James, he gave an abbreviated account
of his adventures. The lawyer looked at him with renewed interest as he
brought the tale to a close.

“You got yourself out of a tight place very well,” he said gravely. “I
congratulate you. You displayed a great deal of ingenuity and carried
your part through well.”

Tommy blushed, his face assuming a prawnlike hue at the praise.

“I couldn’t have got away but for the girl, sir.”

“No.” Sir James smiled a little. “It was lucky for you she happened
to--er--take a fancy to you.” Tommy appeared about to protest, but Sir
James went on. “There’s no doubt about her being one of the gang, I
suppose?”

“I’m afraid not, sir. I thought perhaps they were keeping her there by
force, but the way she acted didn’t fit in with that. You see, she went
back to them when she could have got away.”

Sir James nodded thoughtfully.

“What did she say? Something about wanting to be taken to Marguerite?”

“Yes, sir. I suppose she meant Mrs. Vandemeyer.”

“She always signed herself Rita Vandemeyer. All her friends spoke of
her as Rita. Still, I suppose the girl must have been in the habit of
calling her by her full name. And, at the moment she was crying out to
her, Mrs. Vandemeyer was either dead or dying! Curious! There are one
or two points that strike me as being obscure--their sudden change
of attitude towards yourself, for instance. By the way, the house was
raided, of course?”

“Yes, sir, but they’d all cleared out.”

“Naturally,” said Sir James dryly.

“And not a clue left behind.”

“I wonder----” The lawyer tapped the table thoughtfully.

Something in his voice made Tommy look up. Would this man’s eyes have
seen something where theirs had been blind? He spoke impulsively:

“I wish you’d been there, sir, to go over the house!”

“I wish I had,” said Sir James quietly. He sat for a moment in silence.
Then he looked up. “And since then? What have you been doing?”

For a moment, Tommy stared at him. Then it dawned on him that of course
the lawyer did not know.

“I forgot that you didn’t know about Tuppence,” he said slowly. The
sickening anxiety, forgotten for a while in the excitement of knowing
Jane Finn was found at last, swept over him again.

The lawyer laid down his knife and fork sharply.

“Has anything happened to Miss Tuppence?” His voice was keen-edged.

“She’s disappeared,” said Julius.

“When?”

“A week ago.”

“How?”

Sir James’s questions fairly shot out. Between them Tommy and Julius
gave the history of the last week and their futile search.

Sir James went at once to the root of the matter.

“A wire signed with your name? They knew enough of you both for that.
They weren’t sure of how much you had learnt in that house. Their
kidnapping of Miss Tuppence is the counter-move to your escape. If
necessary they could seal your lips with a threat of what might happen
to her.”

Tommy nodded.

“That’s just what I thought, sir.”

Sir James looked at him keenly. “You had worked that out, had you? Not
bad--not at all bad. The curious thing is that they certainly did not
know anything about you when they first held you prisoner. You are sure
that you did not in any way disclose your identity?”

Tommy shook his head.

“That’s so,” said Julius with a nod. “Therefore I reckon some one put
them wise--and not earlier than Sunday afternoon.”

“Yes, but who?”

“That almighty omniscient Mr. Brown, of course!”

There was a faint note of derision in the American’s voice which made
Sir James look up sharply.

“You don’t believe in Mr. Brown, Mr. Hersheimmer?”

“No, sir, I do not,” returned the young American with emphasis. “Not
as such, that is to say. I reckon it out that he’s a figurehead--just a
bogy name to frighten the children with. The real head of this business
is that Russian chap Kramenin. I guess he’s quite capable of running
revolutions in three countries at once if he chose! The man Whittington
is probably the head of the English branch.”

“I disagree with you,” said Sir James shortly. “Mr. Brown exists.” He
turned to Tommy. “Did you happen to notice where that wire was handed
in?”

“No, sir, I’m afraid I didn’t.”

“H’m. Got it with you?”

“It’s upstairs, sir, in my kit.”

“I’d like to have a look at it sometime. No hurry. You’ve wasted a
week”--Tommy hung his head--“a day or so more is immaterial. We’ll deal
with Miss Jane Finn first. Afterwards, we’ll set to work to rescue Miss
Tuppence from bondage. I don’t think she’s in any immediate danger. That
is, so long as they don’t know that we’ve got Jane Finn, and that
her memory has returned. We must keep that dark at all costs. You
understand?”

The other two assented, and, after making arrangements for meeting on
the morrow, the great lawyer took his leave.

At ten o’clock, the two young men were at the appointed spot. Sir
James had joined them on the doorstep. He alone appeared unexcited. He
introduced them to the doctor.

“Mr. Hersheimmer--Mr. Beresford--Dr. Roylance. How’s the patient?”

“Going on well. Evidently no idea of the flight of time. Asked this
morning how many had been saved from the _Lusitania_. Was it in the
papers yet? That, of course, was only what was to be expected. She seems
to have something on her mind, though.”

“I think we can relieve her anxiety. May we go up?”

“Certainly.”

Tommy’s heart beat sensibly faster as they followed the doctor upstairs.
Jane Finn at last! The long-sought, the mysterious, the elusive Jane
Finn! How wildly improbable success had seemed! And here in this house,
her memory almost miraculously restored, lay the girl who held the
future of England in her hands. A half groan broke from Tommy’s lips.
If only Tuppence could have been at his side to share in the triumphant
conclusion of their joint venture! Then he put the thought of Tuppence
resolutely aside. His confidence in Sir James was growing. There was
a man who would unerringly ferret out Tuppence’s whereabouts. In the
meantime Jane Finn! And suddenly a dread clutched at his heart. It
seemed too easy.... Suppose they should find her dead ... stricken down
by the hand of Mr. Brown?

In another minute he was laughing at these melodramatic fancies. The
doctor held open the door of a room and they passed in. On the white
bed, bandages round her head, lay the girl. Somehow the whole scene
seemed unreal. It was so exactly what one expected that it gave the
effect of being beautifully staged.

The girl looked from one to the other of them with large wondering eyes.
Sir James spoke first.

“Miss Finn,” he said, “this is your cousin, Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer.”

A faint flush flitted over the girl’s face, as Julius stepped forward
and took her hand.

“How do, Cousin Jane?” he said lightly.

But Tommy caught the tremor in his voice.

“Are you really Uncle Hiram’s son?” she asked wonderingly.

Her voice, with the slight warmth of the Western accent, had an almost
thrilling quality. It seemed vaguely familiar to Tommy, but he thrust
the impression aside as impossible.

“Sure thing.”

“We used to read about Uncle Hiram in the papers,” continued the girl,
in her low soft tones. “But I never thought I’d meet you one day. Mother
figured it out that Uncle Hiram would never get over being mad with
her.”

“The old man was like that,” admitted Julius. “But I guess the new
generation’s sort of different. Got no use for the family feud business.
First thing I thought about, soon as the war was over, was to come along
and hunt you up.”

A shadow passed over the girl’s face.

“They’ve been telling me things--dreadful things--that my memory went,
and that there are years I shall never know about--years lost out of my
life.”

“You didn’t realize that yourself?”

The girl’s eyes opened wide.

“Why, no. It seems to me as though it were no time since we were being
hustled into those boats. I can see it all now.” She closed her eyes
with a shudder.

Julius looked across at Sir James, who nodded.

“Don’t worry any. It isn’t worth it. Now, see here, Jane, there’s
something we want to know about. There was a man aboard that boat with
some mighty important papers on him, and the big guns in this country
have got a notion that he passed on the goods to you. Is that so?”

The girl hesitated, her glance shifting to the other two. Julius
understood.

“Mr. Beresford is commissioned by the British Government to get those
papers back. Sir James Peel Edgerton is an English Member of Parliament,
and might be a big gun in the Cabinet if he liked. It’s owing to him
that we’ve ferreted you out at last. So you can go right ahead and tell
us the whole story. Did Danvers give you the papers?”

“Yes. He said they’d have a better chance with me, because they would
save the women and children first.”

“Just as we thought,” said Sir James.

“He said they were very important--that they might make all the
difference to the Allies. But, if it’s all so long ago, and the war’s
over, what does it matter now?”

“I guess history repeats itself, Jane. First there was a great hue
and cry over those papers, then it all died down, and now the whole
caboodle’s started all over again--for rather different reasons. Then
you can hand them over to us right away?”

“But I can’t.”

“What?”

“I haven’t got them.”

“You--haven’t--got them?” Julius punctuated the words with little
pauses.

“No--I hid them.”

“You _hid_ them?”

“Yes. I got uneasy. People seemed to be watching me. It scared
me--badly.” She put her hand to her head. “It’s almost the last thing I
remember before waking up in the hospital....”

“Go on,” said Sir James, in his quiet penetrating tones. “What do you
remember?”

She turned to him obediently.

“It was at Holyhead. I came that way--I don’t remember why....”

“That doesn’t matter. Go on.”

“In the confusion on the quay I slipped away. Nobody saw me. I took a
car. Told the man to drive me out of the town. I watched when we got on
the open road. No other car was following us. I saw a path at the side
of the road. I told the man to wait.”

She paused, then went on. “The path led to the cliff, and down to the
sea between big yellow gorse bushes--they were like golden flames. I
looked round. There wasn’t a soul in sight. But just level with my head
there was a hole in the rock. It was quite small--I could only just get
my hand in, but it went a long way back. I took the oilskin packet from
round my neck and shoved it right in as far as I could. Then I tore off
a bit of gorse--My! but it did prick--and plugged the hole with it so
that you’d never guess there was a crevice of any kind there. Then I
marked the place carefully in my own mind, so that I’d find it again.
There was a queer boulder in the path just there--for all the world
like a dog sitting up begging. Then I went back to the road. The car was
waiting, and I drove back. I just caught the train. I was a bit ashamed
of myself for fancying things maybe, but, by and by, I saw the man
opposite me wink at a woman who was sitting next to me, and I felt
scared again, and was glad the papers were safe. I went out in the
corridor to get a little air. I thought I’d slip into another carriage.
But the woman called me back, said I’d dropped something, and when I
stooped to look, something seemed to hit me--here.” She placed her hand
to the back of her head. “I don’t remember anything more until I woke up
in the hospital.”

There was a pause.

“Thank you, Miss Finn.” It was Sir James who spoke. “I hope we have not
tired you?”

“Oh, that’s all right. My head aches a little, but otherwise I feel
fine.”

Julius stepped forward and took her hand again.

“So long, Cousin Jane. I’m going to get busy after those papers, but
I’ll be back in two shakes of a dog’s tail, and I’ll tote you up to
London and give you the time of your young life before we go back to the
States! I mean it--so hurry up and get well.”



CHAPTER XX. TOO LATE

IN the street they held an informal council of war. Sir James had drawn
a watch from his pocket. “The boat train to Holyhead stops at Chester at
12.14. If you start at once I think you can catch the connection.”

Tommy looked up, puzzled.

“Is there any need to hurry, sir? To-day is only the 24th.”

“I guess it’s always well to get up early in the morning,” said Julius,
before the lawyer had time to reply. “We’ll make tracks for the depot
right away.”

A little frown had settled on Sir James’s brow.

“I wish I could come with you. I am due to speak at a meeting at two
o’clock. It is unfortunate.”

The reluctance in his tone was very evident. It was clear, on the other
hand, that Julius was easily disposed to put up with the loss of the
other’s company.

“I guess there’s nothing complicated about this deal,” he remarked.
“Just a game of hide-and-seek, that’s all.”

“I hope so,” said Sir James.

“Sure thing. What else could it be?”

“You are still young, Mr. Hersheimmer. At my age you will probably have
learnt one lesson. ‘Never underestimate your adversary.’”

The gravity of his tone impressed Tommy, but had little effect upon
Julius.

“You think Mr. Brown might come along and take a hand? If he does, I’m
ready for him.” He slapped his pocket. “I carry a gun. Little Willie
here travels round with me everywhere.” He produced a murderous-looking
automatic, and tapped it affectionately before returning it to its
home. “But he won’t be needed this trip. There’s nobody to put Mr. Brown
wise.”

The lawyer shrugged his shoulders.

“There was nobody to put Mr. Brown wise to the fact that Mrs. Vandemeyer
meant to betray him. Nevertheless, _Mrs. Vandemeyer died without
speaking_.”

Julius was silenced for once, and Sir James added on a lighter note:

“I only want to put you on your guard. Good-bye, and good luck. Take
no unnecessary risks once the papers are in your hands. If there is any
reason to believe that you have been shadowed, destroy them at once.
Good luck to you. The game is in your hands now.” He shook hands with
them both.

Ten minutes later the two young men were seated in a first-class
carriage _en route_ for Chester.

For a long time neither of them spoke. When at length Julius broke the
silence, it was with a totally unexpected remark.

“Say,” he observed thoughtfully, “did you ever make a darned fool of
yourself over a girl’s face?”

Tommy, after a moment’s astonishment, searched his mind.

“Can’t say I have,” he replied at last. “Not that I can recollect,
anyhow. Why?”

“Because for the last two months I’ve been making a sentimental idiot of
myself over Jane! First moment I clapped eyes on her photograph my heart
did all the usual stunts you read about in novels. I guess I’m ashamed
to admit it, but I came over here determined to find her and fix it all
up, and take her back as Mrs. Julius P. Hersheimmer!”

“Oh!” said Tommy, amazed.

Julius uncrossed his legs brusquely and continued:

“Just shows what an almighty fool a man can make of himself! One look at
the girl in the flesh, and I was cured!”

Feeling more tongue-tied than ever, Tommy ejaculated “Oh!” again.

“No disparagement to Jane, mind you,” continued the other. “She’s a real
nice girl, and some fellow will fall in love with her right away.”

“I thought her a very good-looking girl,” said Tommy, finding his
tongue.

“Sure she is. But she’s not like her photo one bit. At least I suppose
she is in a way--must be--because I recognized her right off. If I’d
seen her in a crowd I’d have said ‘There’s a girl whose face I know’
right away without any hesitation. But there was something about that
photo”--Julius shook his head, and heaved a sigh--“I guess romance is a
mighty queer thing!”

“It must be,” said Tommy coldly, “if you can come over here in love with
one girl, and propose to another within a fortnight.”

Julius had the grace to look discomposed.

“Well, you see, I’d got a sort of tired feeling that I’d never find
Jane--and that it was all plumb foolishness anyway. And then--oh, well,
the French, for instance, are much more sensible in the way they look at
things. They keep romance and marriage apart----”

Tommy flushed.

“Well, I’m damned! If that’s----”

Julius hastened to interrupt.

“Say now, don’t be hasty. I don’t mean what you mean. I take it
Americans have a higher opinion of morality than you have even. What I
meant was that the French set about marriage in a businesslike way--find
two people who are suited to one another, look after the money affairs,
and see the whole thing practically, and in a businesslike spirit.”

“If you ask me,” said Tommy, “we’re all too damned businesslike
nowadays. We’re always saying, ‘Will it pay?’ The men are bad enough,
and the girls are worse!”

“Cool down, son. Don’t get so heated.”

“I feel heated,” said Tommy.

Julius looked at him and judged it wise to say no more.

However, Tommy had plenty of time to cool down before they reached
Holyhead, and the cheerful grin had returned to his countenance as they
alighted at their destination.

After consultation, and with the aid of a road map, they were fairly
well agreed as to direction, so were able to hire a taxi without more
ado and drive out on the road leading to Treaddur Bay. They instructed
the man to go slowly, and watched narrowly so as not to miss the path.
They came to it not long after leaving the town, and Tommy stopped the
car promptly, asked in a casual tone whether the path led down to the
sea, and hearing it did paid off the man in handsome style.

A moment later the taxi was slowly chugging back to Holyhead. Tommy and
Julius watched it out of sight, and then turned to the narrow path.

“It’s the right one, I suppose?” asked Tommy doubtfully. “There must be
simply heaps along here.”

“Sure it is. Look at the gorse. Remember what Jane said?”

Tommy looked at the swelling hedges of golden blossom which bordered the
path on either side, and was convinced.

They went down in single file, Julius leading. Twice Tommy turned his
head uneasily. Julius looked back.

“What is it?”

“I don’t know. I’ve got the wind up somehow. Keep fancying there’s some
one following us.”

“Can’t be,” said Julius positively. “We’d see him.”

Tommy had to admit that this was true. Nevertheless, his sense of
uneasiness deepened. In spite of himself he believed in the omniscience
of the enemy.

“I rather wish that fellow would come along,” said Julius. He patted his
pocket. “Little William here is just aching for exercise!”

“Do you always carry it--him--with you?” inquired Tommy with burning
curiosity.

“Most always. I guess you never know what might turn up.”

Tommy kept a respectful silence. He was impressed by little William. It
seemed to remove the menace of Mr. Brown farther away.

The path was now running along the side of the cliff, parallel to the
sea. Suddenly Julius came to such an abrupt halt that Tommy cannoned
into him.

“What’s up?” he inquired.

“Look there. If that doesn’t beat the band!”

Tommy looked. Standing out half obstructing the path was a huge boulder
which certainly bore a fanciful resemblance to a “begging” terrier.

“Well,” said Tommy, refusing to share Julius’s emotion, “it’s what we
expected to see, isn’t it?”

Julius looked at him sadly and shook his head.

“British phlegm! Sure we expected it--but it kind of rattles me, all the
same, to see it sitting there just where we expected to find it!”

Tommy, whose calm was, perhaps, more assumed than natural, moved his
feet impatiently.

“Push on. What about the hole?”

They scanned the cliff-side narrowly. Tommy heard himself saying
idiotically:

“The gorse won’t be there after all these years.”

And Julius replied solemnly:

“I guess you’re right.”

Tommy suddenly pointed with a shaking hand.

“What about that crevice there?”

Julius replied in an awestricken voice:

“That’s it--for sure.”

They looked at each other.

“When I was in France,” said Tommy reminiscently, “whenever my batman
failed to call me, he always said that he had come over queer. I never
believed it. But whether he felt it or not, there _is_ such a sensation.
I’ve got it now! Badly!”

He looked at the rock with a kind of agonized passion.

“Damn it!” he cried. “It’s impossible! Five years! Think of it!
Bird’s-nesting boys, picnic parties, thousands of people passing! It
can’t be there! It’s a hundred to one against its being there! It’s
against all reason!”

Indeed, he felt it to be impossible--more, perhaps, because he could not
believe in his own success where so many others had failed. The thing
was too easy, therefore it could not be. The hole would be empty.

Julius looked at him with a widening smile.

“I guess you’re rattled now all right,” he drawled with some enjoyment.
“Well, here goes!” He thrust his hand into the crevice, and made a
slight grimace. “It’s a tight fit. Jane’s hand must be a few sizes
smaller than mine. I don’t feel anything--no--say, what’s this? Gee
whiz!” And with a flourish he waved aloft a small discoloured packet.
“It’s the goods all right. Sewn up in oilskin. Hold it while I get my
penknife.”

The unbelievable had happened. Tommy held the precious packet tenderly
between his hands. They had succeeded!

“It’s queer,” he murmured idly, “you’d think the stitches would have
rotted. They look just as good as new.”

They cut them carefully and ripped away the oilskin. Inside was a small
folded sheet of paper. With trembling fingers they unfolded it. The
sheet was blank! They stared at each other, puzzled.

“A dummy?” hazarded Julius. “Was Danvers just a decoy?”

Tommy shook his head. That solution did not satisfy him. Suddenly his
face cleared.

“I’ve got it! _Sympathetic ink!_”

“You think so?”

“Worth trying anyhow. Heat usually does the trick. Get some sticks.
We’ll make a fire.”

In a few minutes the little fire of twigs and leaves was blazing
merrily. Tommy held the sheet of paper near the glow. The paper curled a
little with the heat. Nothing more.

Suddenly Julius grasped his arm, and pointed to where characters were
appearing in a faint brown colour.

“Gee whiz! You’ve got it! Say, that idea of yours was great. It never
occurred to me.”

Tommy held the paper in position some minutes longer until he judged the
heat had done its work. Then he withdrew it. A moment later he uttered a
cry.

Across the sheet in neat brown printing ran the words: WITH THE
COMPLIMENTS OF MR. BROWN.



CHAPTER XXI. TOMMY MAKES A DISCOVERY

FOR a moment or two they stood staring at each other stupidly, dazed
with the shock. Somehow, inexplicably, Mr. Brown had forestalled them.
Tommy accepted defeat quietly. Not so Julius.

“How in tarnation did he get ahead of us? That’s what beats me!” he
ended up.

Tommy shook his head, and said dully:

“It accounts for the stitches being new. We might have guessed....”

“Never mind the darned stitches. How did he get ahead of us? We hustled
all we knew. It’s downright impossible for anyone to get here quicker
than we did. And, anyway, how did he know? Do you reckon there was a
dictaphone in Jane’s room? I guess there must have been.”

But Tommy’s common sense pointed out objections.

“No one could have known beforehand that she was going to be in that
house--much less that particular room.”

“That’s so,” admitted Julius. “Then one of the nurses was a crook and
listened at the door. How’s that?”

“I don’t see that it matters anyway,” said Tommy wearily. “He may have
found out some months ago, and removed the papers, then----No, by Jove,
that won’t wash! They’d have been published at once.”

“Sure thing they would! No, some one’s got ahead of us to-day by an hour
or so. But how they did it gets my goat.”

“I wish that chap Peel Edgerton had been with us,” said Tommy
thoughtfully.

“Why?” Julius stared. “The mischief was done when we came.”

“Yes----” Tommy hesitated. He could not explain his own feeling--the
illogical idea that the K.C.’s presence would somehow have averted the
catastrophe. He reverted to his former point of view. “It’s no good
arguing about how it was done. The game’s up. We’ve failed. There’s only
one thing for me to do.”

“What’s that?”

“Get back to London as soon as possible. Mr. Carter must be warned. It’s
only a matter of hours now before the blow falls. But, at any rate, he
ought to know the worst.”

The duty was an unpleasant one, but Tommy had no intention of shirking
it. He must report his failure to Mr. Carter. After that his work was
done. He took the midnight mail to London. Julius elected to stay the
night at Holyhead.

Half an hour after arrival, haggard and pale, Tommy stood before his
chief.

“I’ve come to report, sir. I’ve failed--failed badly.”

Mr. Carter eyed him sharply.

“You mean that the treaty----”

“Is in the hands of Mr. Brown, sir.”

“Ah!” said Mr. Carter quietly. The expression on his face did not
change, but Tommy caught the flicker of despair in his eyes. It
convinced him as nothing else had done that the outlook was hopeless.

“Well,” said Mr. Carter after a minute or two, “we mustn’t sag at the
knees, I suppose. I’m glad to know definitely. We must do what we can.”

Through Tommy’s mind flashed the assurance: “It’s hopeless, and he knows
it’s hopeless!”

The other looked up at him.

“Don’t take it to heart, lad,” he said kindly. “You did your best. You
were up against one of the biggest brains of the century. And you came
very near success. Remember that.”

“Thank you, sir. It’s awfully decent of you.”

“I blame myself. I have been blaming myself ever since I heard this
other news.”

Something in his tone attracted Tommy’s attention. A new fear gripped at
his heart.

“Is there--something more, sir?”

“I’m afraid so,” said Mr. Carter gravely. He stretched out his hand to a
sheet on the table.

“Tuppence----?” faltered Tommy.

“Read for yourself.”

The typewritten words danced before his eyes. The description of a green
toque, a coat with a handkerchief in the pocket marked P.L.C. He looked
an agonized question at Mr. Carter. The latter replied to it:

“Washed up on the Yorkshire coast--near Ebury. I’m afraid--it looks very
much like foul play.”

“My God!” gasped Tommy. “_Tuppence!_ Those devils--I’ll never rest till
I’ve got even with them! I’ll hunt them down! I’ll----”

The pity on Mr. Carter’s face stopped him.

“I know what you feel like, my poor boy. But it’s no good. You’ll waste
your strength uselessly. It may sound harsh, but my advice to you is:
Cut your losses. Time’s merciful. You’ll forget.”

“Forget Tuppence? Never!”

Mr. Carter shook his head.

“So you think now. Well, it won’t bear thinking of--that brave little
girl! I’m sorry about the whole business--confoundedly sorry.”

Tommy came to himself with a start.

“I’m taking up your time, sir,” he said with an effort. “There’s no need
for you to blame yourself. I dare say we were a couple of young fools to
take on such a job. You warned us all right. But I wish to God I’d been
the one to get it in the neck. Good-bye, sir.”

Back at the _Ritz_, Tommy packed up his few belongings mechanically,
his thoughts far away. He was still bewildered by the introduction of
tragedy into his cheerful commonplace existence. What fun they had
had together, he and Tuppence! And now--oh, he couldn’t believe it--it
couldn’t be true! _Tuppence--dead!_ Little Tuppence, brimming over with
life! It was a dream, a horrible dream. Nothing more.

They brought him a note, a few kind words of sympathy from Peel
Edgerton, who had read the news in the paper. (There had been a large
headline: EX-V.A.D. FEARED DROWNED.) The letter ended with the offer
of a post on a ranch in the Argentine, where Sir James had considerable
interests.

“Kind old beggar,” muttered Tommy, as he flung it aside.

The door opened, and Julius burst in with his usual violence. He held an
open newspaper in his hand.

“Say, what’s all this? They seem to have got some fool idea about
Tuppence.”

“It’s true,” said Tommy quietly.

“You mean they’ve done her in?”

Tommy nodded.

“I suppose when they got the treaty she--wasn’t any good to them any
longer, and they were afraid to let her go.”

“Well, I’m darned!” said Julius. “Little Tuppence. She sure was the
pluckiest little girl----”

But suddenly something seemed to crack in Tommy’s brain. He rose to his
feet.

“Oh, get out! You don’t really care, damn you! You asked her to marry
you in your rotten cold-blooded way, but I _loved_ her. I’d have given
the soul out of my body to save her from harm. I’d have stood by without
a word and let her marry you, because you could have given her the sort
of time she ought to have had, and I was only a poor devil without a
penny to bless himself with. But it wouldn’t have been because I didn’t
care!”

“See here,” began Julius temperately.

“Oh, go to the devil! I can’t stand your coming here and talking about
‘little Tuppence.’ Go and look after your cousin. Tuppence is my girl!
I’ve always loved her, from the time we played together as kids. We
grew up and it was just the same. I shall never forget when I was in
hospital, and she came in in that ridiculous cap and apron! It was like
a miracle to see the girl I loved turn up in a nurse’s kit----”

But Julius interrupted him.

“A nurse’s kit! Gee whiz! I must be going to Colney Hatch! I could swear
I’ve seen Jane in a nurse’s cap too. And that’s plumb impossible! No,
by gum, I’ve got it! It was her I saw talking to Whittington at that
nursing home in Bournemouth. She wasn’t a patient there! She was a
nurse!”

“I dare say,” said Tommy angrily, “she’s probably been in with them from
the start. I shouldn’t wonder if she stole those papers from Danvers to
begin with.”

“I’m darned if she did!” shouted Julius. “She’s my cousin, and as
patriotic a girl as ever stepped.”

“I don’t care a damn what she is, but get out of here!” retorted Tommy
also at the top of his voice.

The young men were on the point of coming to blows. But suddenly, with
an almost magical abruptness, Julius’s anger abated.

“All right, son,” he said quietly, “I’m going. I don’t blame you any for
what you’ve been saying. It’s mighty lucky you did say it. I’ve been
the most almighty blithering darned idiot that it’s possible to imagine.
Calm down”--Tommy had made an impatient gesture--“I’m going right away
now--going to the London and North Western Railway depot, if you want to
know.”

“I don’t care a damn where you’re going,” growled Tommy.

As the door closed behind Julius, he returned to his suit-case.

“That’s the lot,” he murmured, and rang the bell.

“Take my luggage down.”

“Yes, sir. Going away, sir?”

“I’m going to the devil,” said Tommy, regardless of the menial’s
feelings.

That functionary, however, merely replied respectfully:

“Yes, sir. Shall I call a taxi?”

Tommy nodded.

Where was he going? He hadn’t the faintest idea. Beyond a fixed
determination to get even with Mr. Brown he had no plans. He re-read Sir
James’s letter, and shook his head. Tuppence must be avenged. Still, it
was kind of the old fellow.

“Better answer it, I suppose.” He went across to the writing-table.
With the usual perversity of bedroom stationery, there were innumerable
envelopes and no paper. He rang. No one came. Tommy fumed at the
delay. Then he remembered that there was a good supply in Julius’s
sitting-room. The American had announced his immediate departure, there
would be no fear of running up against him. Besides, he wouldn’t mind if
he did. He was beginning to be rather ashamed of the things he had said.
Old Julius had taken them jolly well. He’d apologize if he found him
there.

But the room was deserted. Tommy walked across to the writing-table,
and opened the middle drawer. A photograph, carelessly thrust in face
upwards, caught his eye. For a moment he stood rooted to the ground.
Then he took it out, shut the drawer, walked slowly over to an
arm-chair, and sat down still staring at the photograph in his hand.

What on earth was a photograph of the French girl Annette doing in
Julius Hersheimmer’s writing-table?



CHAPTER XXII. IN DOWNING STREET

THE Prime Minister tapped the desk in front of him with nervous fingers.
His face was worn and harassed. He took up his conversation with Mr.
Carter at the point it had broken off. “I don’t understand,” he said.
“Do you really mean that things are not so desperate after all?”

“So this lad seems to think.”

“Let’s have a look at his letter again.”

Mr. Carter handed it over. It was written in a sprawling boyish hand.

“DEAR MR. CARTER,

“Something’s turned up that has given me a jar. Of course I may be
simply making an awful ass of myself, but I don’t think so. If my
conclusions are right, that girl at Manchester was just a plant. The
whole thing was prearranged, sham packet and all, with the object of
making us think the game was up--therefore I fancy that we must have
been pretty hot on the scent.

“I think I know who the real Jane Finn is, and I’ve even got an idea
where the papers are. That last’s only a guess, of course, but I’ve a
sort of feeling it’ll turn out right. Anyhow, I enclose it in a sealed
envelope for what it’s worth. I’m going to ask you not to open it until
the very last moment, midnight on the 28th, in fact. You’ll understand
why in a minute. You see, I’ve figured it out that those things of
Tuppence’s are a plant too, and she’s no more drowned than I am. The way
I reason is this: as a last chance they’ll let Jane Finn escape in
the hope that she’s been shamming this memory stunt, and that once she
thinks she’s free she’ll go right away to the cache. Of course it’s
an awful risk for them to take, because she knows all about them--but
they’re pretty desperate to get hold of that treaty. _But if they know
that the papers have been recovered by us_, neither of those two girls’
lives will be worth an hour’s purchase. I must try and get hold of
Tuppence before Jane escapes.

“I want a repeat of that telegram that was sent to Tuppence at the
_Ritz_. Sir James Peel Edgerton said you would be able to manage that
for me. He’s frightfully clever.

“One last thing--please have that house in Soho watched day and night.

“Yours, etc.,

“THOMAS BERESFORD.”

The Prime Minister looked up.

“The enclosure?”

Mr. Carter smiled dryly.

“In the vaults of the Bank. I am taking no chances.”

“You don’t think”--the Prime Minister hesitated a minute--“that it would
be better to open it now? Surely we ought to secure the document, that
is, provided the young man’s guess turns out to be correct, at once. We
can keep the fact of having done so quite secret.”

“Can we? I’m not so sure. There are spies all round us. Once it’s known
I wouldn’t give that”--he snapped his fingers--“for the life of those
two girls. No, the boy trusted me, and I shan’t let him down.”

“Well, well, we must leave it at that, then. What’s he like, this lad?”

“Outwardly, he’s an ordinary clean-limbed, rather block-headed young
Englishman. Slow in his mental processes. On the other hand, it’s quite
impossible to lead him astray through his imagination. He hasn’t got
any--so he’s difficult to deceive. He worries things out slowly, and
once he’s got hold of anything he doesn’t let go. The little lady’s
quite different. More intuition and less common sense. They make a
pretty pair working together. Pace and stamina.”

“He seems confident,” mused the Prime Minister.

“Yes, and that’s what gives me hope. He’s the kind of diffident youth
who would have to be _very_ sure before he ventured an opinion at all.”

A half smile came to the other’s lips.

“And it is this--boy who will defeat the master criminal of our time?”

“This--boy, as you say! But I sometimes fancy I see a shadow behind.”

“You mean?”

“Peel Edgerton.”

“Peel Edgerton?” said the Prime Minister in astonishment.

“Yes. I see his hand in _this_.” He struck the open letter. “He’s
there--working in the dark, silently, unobtrusively. I’ve always felt
that if anyone was to run Mr. Brown to earth, Peel Edgerton would be the
man. I tell you he’s on the case now, but doesn’t want it known. By the
way, I got rather an odd request from him the other day.”

“Yes?”

“He sent me a cutting from some American paper. It referred to a man’s
body found near the docks in New York about three weeks ago. He asked me
to collect any information on the subject I could.”

“Well?”

Carter shrugged his shoulders.

“I couldn’t get much. Young fellow about thirty-five--poorly
dressed--face very badly disfigured. He was never identified.”

“And you fancy that the two matters are connected in some way?”

“Somehow I do. I may be wrong, of course.”

There was a pause, then Mr. Carter continued:

“I asked him to come round here. Not that we’ll get anything out of him
he doesn’t want to tell. His legal instincts are too strong. But there’s
no doubt he can throw light on one or two obscure points in young
Beresford’s letter. Ah, here he is!”

The two men rose to greet the new-comer. A half whimsical thought
flashed across the Premier’s mind. “My successor, perhaps!”

“We’ve had a letter from young Beresford,” said Mr. Carter, coming to
the point at once. “You’ve seen him, I suppose?”

“You suppose wrong,” said the lawyer.

“Oh!” Mr. Carter was a little nonplussed.

Sir James smiled, and stroked his chin.

“He rang me up,” he volunteered.

“Would you have any objection to telling us exactly what passed between
you?”

“Not at all. He thanked me for a certain letter which I had written to
him--as a matter of fact, I had offered him a job. Then he reminded
me of something I had said to him at Manchester respecting that bogus
telegram which lured Miss Cowley away. I asked him if anything untoward
had occurred. He said it had--that in a drawer in Mr. Hersheimmer’s room
he had discovered a photograph.” The lawyer paused, then continued: “I
asked him if the photograph bore the name and address of a Californian
photographer. He replied: ‘You’re on to it, sir. It had.’ Then he went
on to tell me something I _didn’t_ know. The original of that photograph
was the French girl, Annette, who saved his life.”

“What?”

“Exactly. I asked the young man with some curiosity what he had done
with the photograph. He replied that he had put it back where he found
it.” The lawyer paused again. “That was good, you know--distinctly
good. He can use his brains, that young fellow. I congratulated him. The
discovery was a providential one. Of course, from the moment that the
girl in Manchester was proved to be a plant everything was altered.
Young Beresford saw that for himself without my having to tell it
him. But he felt he couldn’t trust his judgment on the subject of
Miss Cowley. Did I think she was alive? I told him, duly weighing the
evidence, that there was a very decided chance in favour of it. That
brought us back to the telegram.”

“Yes?”

“I advised him to apply to you for a copy of the original wire. It
had occurred to me as probable that, after Miss Cowley flung it on the
floor, certain words might have been erased and altered with the express
intention of setting searchers on a false trail.”

Carter nodded. He took a sheet from his pocket, and read aloud:

“Come at once, Astley Priors, Gatehouse, Kent. Great
developments--TOMMY.”

“Very simple,” said Sir James, “and very ingenious. Just a few words
to alter, and the thing was done. And the one important clue they
overlooked.”

“What was that?”

“The page-boy’s statement that Miss Cowley drove to Charing Cross. They
were so sure of themselves that they took it for granted he had made a
mistake.”

“Then young Beresford is now?”

“At Gatehouse, Kent, unless I am much mistaken.”

Mr. Carter looked at him curiously.

“I rather wonder you’re not there too, Peel Edgerton?”

“Ah, I’m busy on a case.”

“I thought you were on your holiday?”

“Oh, I’ve not been briefed. Perhaps it would be more correct to say I’m
preparing a case. Any more facts about that American chap for me?”

“I’m afraid not. Is it important to find out who he was?”

“Oh, I know who he was,” said Sir James easily. “I can’t prove it
yet--but I know.”

The other two asked no questions. They had an instinct that it would be
mere waste of breath.

“But what I don’t understand,” said the Prime-Minister suddenly, “is how
that photograph came to be in Mr. Hersheimmer’s drawer?”

“Perhaps it never left it,” suggested the lawyer gently.

“But the bogus inspector? Inspector Brown?”

“Ah!” said Sir James thoughtfully. He rose to his feet. “I mustn’t keep
you. Go on with the affairs of the nation. I must get back to--my case.”

Two days later Julius Hersheimmer returned from Manchester. A note from
Tommy lay on his table:

“DEAR HERSHEIMMER,

“Sorry I lost my temper. In case I don’t see you again, good-bye. I’ve
been offered a job in the Argentine, and might as well take it.

“Yours,

“TOMMY BERESFORD.”

A peculiar smile lingered for a moment on Julius’s face. He threw the
letter into the waste-paper basket.

“The darned fool!” he murmured.



CHAPTER XXIII. A RACE AGAINST TIME

AFTER ringing up Sir James, Tommy’s next procedure was to make a call
at South Audley Mansions. He found Albert discharging his professional
duties, and introduced himself without more ado as a friend of
Tuppence’s. Albert unbent immediately.

“Things has been very quiet here lately,” he said wistfully. “Hope the
young lady’s keeping well, sir?”

“That’s just the point, Albert. She’s disappeared.”

“You don’t mean as the crooks have got her?”

“They have.”

“In the Underworld?”

“No, dash it all, in this world!”

“It’s a h’expression, sir,” explained Albert. “At the pictures the
crooks always have a restoorant in the Underworld. But do you think as
they’ve done her in, sir?”

“I hope not. By the way, have you by any chance an aunt, a cousin,
a grandmother, or any other suitable female relation who might be
represented as being likely to kick the bucket?”

A delighted grin spread slowly over Albert’s countenance.

“I’m on, sir. My poor aunt what lives in the country has been mortal bad
for a long time, and she’s asking for me with her dying breath.”

Tommy nodded approval.

“Can you report this in the proper quarter and meet me at Charing Cross
in an hour’s time?”

“I’ll be there, sir. You can count on me.”

As Tommy had judged, the faithful Albert proved an invaluable ally. The
two took up their quarters at the inn in Gatehouse. To Albert fell the
task of collecting information. There was no difficulty about it.

Astley Priors was the property of a Dr. Adams. The doctor no longer
practiced, had retired, the landlord believed, but he took a few private
patients--here the good fellow tapped his forehead knowingly--“balmy
ones! You understand!” The doctor was a popular figure in the village,
subscribed freely to all the local sports--“a very pleasant, affable
gentleman.” Been there long? Oh, a matter of ten years or so--might be
longer. Scientific gentleman, he was. Professors and people often came
down from town to see him. Anyway, it was a gay house, always visitors.

In the face of all this volubility, Tommy felt doubts. Was it possible
that this genial, well-known figure could be in reality a dangerous
criminal? His life seemed so open and aboveboard. No hint of sinister
doings. Suppose it was all a gigantic mistake? Tommy felt a cold chill
at the thought.

Then he remembered the private patients--“balmy ones.” He inquired
carefully if there was a young lady amongst them, describing Tuppence.
But nothing much seemed to be known about the patients--they were seldom
seen outside the grounds. A guarded description of Annette also failed
to provoke recognition.

Astley Priors was a pleasant red-brick edifice, surrounded by
well-wooded grounds which effectually shielded the house from
observation from the road.

On the first evening Tommy, accompanied by Albert, explored the grounds.
Owing to Albert’s insistence they dragged themselves along painfully on
their stomachs, thereby producing a great deal more noise than if
they had stood upright. In any case, these precautions were totally
unnecessary. The grounds, like those of any other private house after
nightfall, seemed untenanted. Tommy had imagined a possible fierce
watchdog. Albert’s fancy ran to a puma, or a tame cobra. But they
reached a shrubbery near the house quite unmolested.

The blinds of the dining-room window were up. There was a large company
assembled round the table. The port was passing from hand to hand. It
seemed a normal, pleasant company. Through the open window scraps of
conversation floated out disjointedly on the night air. It was a heated
discussion on county cricket!

Again Tommy felt that cold chill of uncertainty. It seemed impossible
to believe that these people were other than they seemed. Had he been
fooled once more? The fair-bearded, spectacled gentleman who sat at the
head of the table looked singularly honest and normal.

Tommy slept badly that night. The following morning the indefatigable
Albert, having cemented an alliance with the greengrocer’s boy, took the
latter’s place and ingratiated himself with the cook at Malthouse.
He returned with the information that she was undoubtedly “one of
the crooks,” but Tommy mistrusted the vividness of his imagination.
Questioned, he could adduce nothing in support of his statement except
his own opinion that she wasn’t the usual kind. You could see that at a
glance.

The substitution being repeated (much to the pecuniary advantage of the
real greengrocer’s boy) on the following day, Albert brought back the
first piece of hopeful news. There _was_ a French young lady staying
in the house. Tommy put his doubts aside. Here was confirmation of
his theory. But time pressed. To-day was the 27th. The 29th was the
much-talked-of “Labour Day,” about which all sorts of rumours were
running riot. Newspapers were getting agitated. Sensational hints of a
Labour _coup d’état_ were freely reported. The Government said nothing.
It knew and was prepared. There were rumours of dissension among the
Labour leaders. They were not of one mind. The more far-seeing among
them realized that what they proposed might well be a death-blow to the
England that at heart they loved. They shrank from the starvation and
misery a general strike would entail, and were willing to meet the
Government half-way. But behind them were subtle, insistent forces at
work, urging the memories of old wrongs, deprecating the weakness of
half-and-half measures, fomenting misunderstandings.

Tommy felt that, thanks to Mr. Carter, he understood the position fairly
accurately. With the fatal document in the hands of Mr. Brown,
public opinion would swing to the side of the Labour extremists and
revolutionists. Failing that, the battle was an even chance. The
Government with a loyal army and police force behind them might
win--but at a cost of great suffering. But Tommy nourished another and
a preposterous dream. With Mr. Brown unmasked and captured he
believed, rightly or wrongly, that the whole organization would crumble
ignominiously and instantaneously. The strange permeating influence
of the unseen chief held it together. Without him, Tommy believed an
instant panic would set in; and, the honest men left to themselves, an
eleventh-hour reconciliation would be possible.

“This is a one-man show,” said Tommy to himself. “The thing to do is to
get hold of the man.”

It was partly in furtherance of this ambitious design that he had
requested Mr. Carter not to open the sealed envelope. The draft
treaty was Tommy’s bait. Every now and then he was aghast at his own
presumption. How dared he think that he had discovered what so many
wiser and clever men had overlooked? Nevertheless, he stuck tenaciously
to his idea.

That evening he and Albert once more penetrated the grounds of Astley
Priors. Tommy’s ambition was somehow or other to gain admission to the
house itself. As they approached cautiously, Tommy gave a sudden gasp.

On the second floor window some one standing between the window and
the light in the room threw a silhouette on the blind. It was one Tommy
would have recognized anywhere! Tuppence was in that house!

He clutched Albert by the shoulder.

“Stay here! When I begin to sing, watch that window.”

He retreated hastily to a position on the main drive, and began in a
deep roar, coupled with an unsteady gait, the following ditty:


          I am a Soldier
          A jolly British Soldier;
          You can see that I’m a Soldier by my feet....

It had been a favourite on the gramophone in Tuppence’s hospital days.
He did not doubt but that she would recognize it and draw her own
conclusions. Tommy had not a note of music in his voice, but his lungs
were excellent. The noise he produced was terrific.

Presently an unimpeachable butler, accompanied by an equally
unimpeachable footman, issued from the front door. The butler
remonstrated with him. Tommy continued to sing, addressing the butler
affectionately as “dear old whiskers.” The footman took him by one arm,
the butler by the other. They ran him down the drive, and neatly out
of the gate. The butler threatened him with the police if he intruded
again. It was beautifully done--soberly and with perfect decorum. Anyone
would have sworn that the butler was a real butler, the footman a real
footman--only, as it happened, the butler was Whittington!

Tommy retired to the inn and waited for Albert’s return. At last that
worthy made his appearance.

“Well?” cried Tommy eagerly.

“It’s all right. While they was a-running of you out the window opened,
and something was chucked out.” He handed a scrap of paper to Tommy. “It
was wrapped round a letterweight.”

On the paper were scrawled three words: “To-morrow--same time.”

“Good egg!” cried Tommy. “We’re getting going.”

“I wrote a message on a piece of paper, wrapped it round a stone, and
chucked it through the window,” continued Albert breathlessly.

Tommy groaned.

“Your zeal will be the undoing of us, Albert. What did you say?”

“Said we was a-staying at the inn. If she could get away, to come there
and croak like a frog.”

“She’ll know that’s you,” said Tommy with a sigh of relief. “Your
imagination runs away with you, you know, Albert. Why, you wouldn’t
recognize a frog croaking if you heard it.”

Albert looked rather crest-fallen.

“Cheer up,” said Tommy. “No harm done. That butler’s an old friend of
mine--I bet he knew who I was, though he didn’t let on. It’s not their
game to show suspicion. That’s why we’ve found it fairly plain sailing.
They don’t want to discourage me altogether. On the other hand, they
don’t want to make it too easy. I’m a pawn in their game, Albert, that’s
what I am. You see, if the spider lets the fly walk out too easily,
the fly might suspect it was a put-up job. Hence the usefulness of that
promising youth, Mr. T. Beresford, who’s blundered in just at the right
moment for them. But later, Mr. T. Beresford had better look out!”

Tommy retired for the night in a state of some elation. He had
elaborated a careful plan for the following evening. He felt sure that
the inhabitants of Astley Priors would not interfere with him up to
a certain point. It was after that that Tommy proposed to give them a
surprise.

About twelve o’clock, however, his calm was rudely shaken. He was told
that some one was demanding him in the bar. The applicant proved to be a
rude-looking carter well coated with mud.

“Well, my good fellow, what is it?” asked Tommy.

“Might this be for you, sir?” The carter held out a very dirty folded
note, on the outside of which was written: “Take this to the gentleman
at the inn near Astley Priors. He will give you ten shillings.”

The handwriting was Tuppence’s. Tommy appreciated her quick-wittedness
in realizing that he might be staying at the inn under an assumed name.
He snatched at it.

“That’s all right.”

The man withheld it.

“What about my ten shillings?”

Tommy hastily produced a ten-shilling note, and the man relinquished his
find. Tommy unfastened it.

“DEAR TOMMY,

“I knew it was you last night. Don’t go this evening. They’ll be lying
in wait for you. They’re taking us away this morning. I heard something
about Wales--Holyhead, I think. I’ll drop this on the road if I get a
chance. Annette told me how you’d escaped. Buck up.

“Yours,

“TWOPENCE.”

Tommy raised a shout for Albert before he had even finished perusing
this characteristic epistle.

“Pack my bag! We’re off!”

“Yes, sir.” The boots of Albert could be heard racing upstairs.
Holyhead? Did that mean that, after all---- Tommy was puzzled. He read
on slowly.

The boots of Albert continued to be active on the floor above.

Suddenly a second shout came from below.

“Albert! I’m a damned fool! Unpack that bag!”

“Yes, sir.”

Tommy smoothed out the note thoughtfully.

“Yes, a damned fool,” he said softly. “But so’s some one else! And at
last I know who it is!”



CHAPTER XXIV. JULIUS TAKES A HAND

IN his suite at Claridge’s, Kramenin reclined on a couch and dictated to
his secretary in sibilant Russian.

Presently the telephone at the secretary’s elbow purred, and he took up
the receiver, spoke for a minute or two, then turned to his employer.

“Some one below is asking for you.”

“Who is it?”

“He gives the name of Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer.”

“Hersheimmer,” repeated Kramenin thoughtfully. “I have heard that name
before.”

“His father was one of the steel kings of America,” explained the
secretary, whose business it was to know everything. “This young man
must be a millionaire several times over.”

The other’s eyes narrowed appreciatively.

“You had better go down and see him, Ivan. Find out what he wants.”

The secretary obeyed, closing the door noiselessly behind him. In a few
minutes he returned.

“He declines to state his business--says it is entirely private and
personal, and that he must see you.”

“A millionaire several times over,” murmured Kramenin. “Bring him up, my
dear Ivan.”

The secretary left the room once more, and returned escorting Julius.

“Monsieur Kramenin?” said the latter abruptly.

The Russian, studying him attentively with his pale venomous eyes,
bowed.

“Pleased to meet you,” said the American. “I’ve got some very important
business I’d like to talk over with you, if I can see you alone.” He
looked pointedly at the other.

“My secretary, Monsieur Grieber, from whom I have no secrets.”

“That may be so--but I have,” said Julius dryly. “So I’d be obliged if
you’d tell him to scoot.”

“Ivan,” said the Russian softly, “perhaps you would not mind retiring
into the next room----”

“The next room won’t do,” interrupted Julius. “I know these ducal
suites--and I want this one plumb empty except for you and me. Send him
round to a store to buy a penn’orth of peanuts.”

Though not particularly enjoying the American’s free and easy manner
of speech, Kramenin was devoured by curiosity. “Will your business take
long to state?”

“Might be an all night job if you caught on.”

“Very good, Ivan. I shall not require you again this evening. Go to the
theatre--take a night off.”

“Thank you, your excellency.”

The secretary bowed and departed.

Julius stood at the door watching his retreat. Finally, with a satisfied
sigh, he closed it, and came back to his position in the centre of the
room.

“Now, Mr. Hersheimmer, perhaps you will be so kind as to come to the
point?”

“I guess that won’t take a minute,” drawled Julius. Then, with an abrupt
change of manner: “Hands up--or I shoot!”

For a moment Kramenin stared blindly into the big automatic, then, with
almost comical haste, he flung up his hands above his head. In that
instant Julius had taken his measure. The man he had to deal with was an
abject physical coward--the rest would be easy.

“This is an outrage,” cried the Russian in a high hysterical voice. “An
outrage! Do you mean to kill me?”

“Not if you keep your voice down. Don’t go edging sideways towards that
bell. That’s better.”

“What do you want? Do nothing rashly. Remember my life is of the utmost
value to my country. I may have been maligned----”

“I reckon,” said Julius, “that the man who let daylight into you would
be doing humanity a good turn. But you needn’t worry any. I’m not
proposing to kill you this trip--that is, if you’re reasonable.”

The Russian quailed before the stern menace in the other’s eyes. He
passed his tongue over his dry lips.

“What do you want? Money?”

“No. I want Jane Finn.”

“Jane Finn? I--never heard of her!”

“You’re a darned liar! You know perfectly who I mean.”

“I tell you I’ve never heard of the girl.”

“And I tell you,” retorted Julius, “that Little Willie here is just
hopping mad to go off!”

The Russian wilted visibly.

“You wouldn’t dare----”

“Oh, yes, I would, son!”

Kramenin must have recognized something in the voice that carried
conviction, for he said sullenly:

“Well? Granted I do know who you mean--what of it?”

“You will tell me now--right here--where she is to be found.”

Kramenin shook his head.

“I daren’t.”

“Why not?”

“I daren’t. You ask an impossibility.”

“Afraid, eh? Of whom? Mr. Brown? Ah, that tickles you up! There is such
a person, then? I doubted it. And the mere mention of him scares you
stiff!”

“I have seen him,” said the Russian slowly. “Spoken to him face to face.
I did not know it until afterwards. He was one of a crowd. I should not
know him again. Who is he really? I do not know. But I know this--he is
a man to fear.”

“He’ll never know,” said Julius.

“He knows everything--and his vengeance is swift. Even
I--Kramenin!--would not be exempt!”

“Then you won’t do as I ask you?”

“You ask an impossibility.”

“Sure that’s a pity for you,” said Julius cheerfully. “But the world in
general will benefit.” He raised the revolver.

“Stop,” shrieked the Russian. “You cannot mean to shoot me?”

“Of course I do. I’ve always heard you Revolutionists held life cheap,
but it seems there’s a difference when it’s your own life in question.
I gave you just one chance of saving your dirty skin, and that you
wouldn’t take!”

“They would kill me!”

“Well,” said Julius pleasantly, “it’s up to you. But I’ll just say this.
Little Willie here is a dead cert, and if I was you I’d take a sporting
chance with Mr. Brown!”

“You will hang if you shoot me,” muttered the Russian irresolutely.

“No, stranger, that’s where you’re wrong. You forget the dollars. A
big crowd of solicitors will get busy, and they’ll get some high-brow
doctors on the job, and the end of it all will be that they’ll say my
brain was unhinged. I shall spend a few months in a quiet sanatorium, my
mental health will improve, the doctors will declare me sane again, and
all will end happily for little Julius. I guess I can bear a few months’
retirement in order to rid the world of you, but don’t you kid yourself
I’ll hang for it!”

The Russian believed him. Corrupt himself, he believed implicitly in the
power of money. He had read of American murder trials running much on
the lines indicated by Julius. He had bought and sold justice himself.
This virile young American, with the significant drawling voice, had the
whip hand of him.

“I’m going to count five,” continued Julius, “and I guess, if you let me
get past four, you needn’t worry any about Mr. Brown. Maybe he’ll send
some flowers to the funeral, but _you_ won’t smell them! Are you ready?
I’ll begin. One--two--three--four----”

The Russian interrupted with a shriek:

“Do not shoot. I will do all you wish.”

Julius lowered the revolver.

“I thought you’d hear sense. Where is the girl?”

“At Gatehouse, in Kent. Astley Priors, the place is called.”

“Is she a prisoner there?”

“She’s not allowed to leave the house--though it’s safe enough really.
The little fool has lost her memory, curse her!”

“That’s been annoying for you and your friends, I reckon. What about the
other girl, the one you decoyed away over a week ago?”

“She’s there too,” said the Russian sullenly.

“That’s good,” said Julius. “Isn’t it all panning out beautifully? And a
lovely night for the run!”

“What run?” demanded Kramenin, with a stare.

“Down to Gatehouse, sure. I hope you’re fond of motoring?”

“What do you mean? I refuse to go.”

“Now don’t get mad. You must see I’m not such a kid as to leave you
here. You’d ring up your friends on that telephone first thing! Ah!” He
observed the fall on the other’s face. “You see, you’d got it all fixed.
No, sir, you’re coming along with me. This your bedroom next door here?
Walk right in. Little Willie and I will come behind. Put on a thick
coat, that’s right. Fur lined? And you a Socialist! Now we’re ready. We
walk downstairs and out through the hall to where my car’s waiting. And
don’t you forget I’ve got you covered every inch of the way. I can shoot
just as well through my coat pocket. One word, or a glance even, at one
of those liveried menials, and there’ll sure be a strange face in the
Sulphur and Brimstone Works!”

Together they descended the stairs, and passed out to the waiting car.
The Russian was shaking with rage. The hotel servants surrounded them.
A cry hovered on his lips, but at the last minute his nerve failed him.
The American was a man of his word.

When they reached the car, Julius breathed a sigh of relief. The
danger-zone was passed. Fear had successfully hypnotized the man by his
side.

“Get in,” he ordered. Then as he caught the other’s sidelong glance,
“No, the chauffeur won’t help you any. Naval man. Was on a submarine in
Russia when the Revolution broke out. A brother of his was murdered by
your people. George!”

“Yes, sir?” The chauffeur turned his head.

“This gentleman is a Russian Bolshevik. We don’t want to shoot him, but
it may be necessary. You understand?”

“Perfectly, sir.”

“I want to go to Gatehouse in Kent. Know the road at all?”

“Yes, sir, it will be about an hour and a half’s run.”

“Make it an hour. I’m in a hurry.”

“I’ll do my best, sir.” The car shot forward through the traffic.

Julius ensconced himself comfortably by the side of his victim. He kept
his hand in the pocket of his coat, but his manner was urbane to the
last degree.

“There was a man I shot once in Arizona----” he began cheerfully.

At the end of the hour’s run the unfortunate Kramenin was more dead than
alive. In succession to the anecdote of the Arizona man, there had been
a tough from ‘Frisco, and an episode in the Rockies. Julius’s narrative
style, if not strictly accurate, was picturesque!

Slowing down, the chauffeur called over his shoulder that they were just
coming into Gatehouse. Julius bade the Russian direct them. His plan was
to drive straight up to the house. There Kramenin was to ask for the two
girls. Julius explained to him that Little Willie would not be tolerant
of failure. Kramenin, by this time, was as putty in the other’s hands.
The terrific pace they had come had still further unmanned him. He had
given himself up for dead at every corner.

The car swept up the drive, and stopped before the porch. The chauffeur
looked round for orders.

“Turn the car first, George. Then ring the bell, and get back to your
place. Keep the engine going, and be ready to scoot like hell when I
give the word.”

“Very good, sir.”

The front door was opened by the butler. Kramenin felt the muzzle of the
revolver pressed against his ribs.

“Now,” hissed Julius. “And be careful.”

The Russian beckoned. His lips were white, and his voice was not very
steady:

“It is I--Kramenin! Bring down the girl at once! There is no time to
lose!”

Whittington had come down the steps. He uttered an exclamation of
astonishment at seeing the other.

“You! What’s up? Surely you know the plan----”

Kramenin interrupted him, using the words that have created many
unnecessary panics:

“We have been betrayed! Plans must be abandoned. We must save our own
skins. The girl! And at once! It’s our only chance.”

Whittington hesitated, but for hardly a moment.

“You have orders--from _him?_”

“Naturally! Should I be here otherwise? Hurry! There is no time to be
lost. The other little fool had better come too.”

Whittington turned and ran back into the house. The agonizing minutes
went by. Then--two figures hastily huddled in cloaks appeared on the
steps and were hustled into the car. The smaller of the two was inclined
to resist and Whittington shoved her in unceremoniously. Julius leaned
forward, and in doing so the light from the open door lit up his face.
Another man on the steps behind Whittington gave a startled exclamation.
Concealment was at an end.

“Get a move on, George,” shouted Julius.

The chauffeur slipped in his clutch, and with a bound the car started.

The man on the steps uttered an oath. His hand went to his pocket. There
was a flash and a report. The bullet just missed the taller girl by an
inch.

“Get down, Jane,” cried Julius. “Flat on the bottom of the car.” He
thrust her sharply forward, then standing up, he took careful aim and
fired.

“Have you hit him?” cried Tuppence eagerly.

“Sure,” replied Julius. “He isn’t killed, though. Skunks like that take
a lot of killing. Are you all right, Tuppence?”

“Of course I am. Where’s Tommy? And who’s this?” She indicated the
shivering Kramenin.

“Tommy’s making tracks for the Argentine. I guess he thought you’d
turned up your toes. Steady through the gate, George! That’s right.
It’ll take ‘em at least five minutes to get busy after us. They’ll use
the telephone, I guess, so look out for snares ahead--and don’t take the
direct route. Who’s this, did you say, Tuppence? Let me present Monsieur
Kramenin. I persuaded him to come on the trip for his health.”

The Russian remained mute, still livid with terror.

“But what made them let us go?” demanded Tuppence suspiciously.

“I reckon Monsieur Kramenin here asked them so prettily they just
couldn’t refuse!”

This was too much for the Russian. He burst out vehemently:

“Curse you--curse you! They know now that I betrayed them. My life won’t
be safe for an hour in this country.”

“That’s so,” assented Julius. “I’d advise you to make tracks for Russia
right away.”

“Let me go, then,” cried the other. “I have done what you asked. Why do
you still keep me with you?”

“Not for the pleasure of your company. I guess you can get right off now
if you want to. I thought you’d rather I tooled you back to London.”

“You may never reach London,” snarled the other. “Let me go here and
now.”

“Sure thing. Pull up, George. The gentleman’s not making the return
trip. If I ever come to Russia, Monsieur Kramenin, I shall expect a
rousing welcome, and----”

But before Julius had finished his speech, and before the car had
finally halted, the Russian had swung himself out and disappeared into
the night.

“Just a mite impatient to leave us,” commented Julius, as the car
gathered way again. “And no idea of saying good-bye politely to the
ladies. Say, Jane, you can get up on the seat now.”

For the first time the girl spoke.

“How did you ‘persuade’ him?” she asked.

Julius tapped his revolver.

“Little Willie here takes the credit!”

“Splendid!” cried the girl. The colour surged into her face, her eyes
looked admiringly at Julius.

“Annette and I didn’t know what was going to happen to us,” said
Tuppence. “Old Whittington hurried us off. _We_ thought it was lambs to
the slaughter.”

“Annette,” said Julius. “Is that what you call her?”

His mind seemed to be trying to adjust itself to a new idea.

“It’s her name,” said Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide.

“Shucks!” retorted Julius. “She may think it’s her name, because her
memory’s gone, poor kid. But it’s the one real and original Jane Finn
we’ve got here.”

“What?” cried Tuppence.

But she was interrupted. With an angry spurt, a bullet embedded itself
in the upholstery of the car just behind her head.

“Down with you,” cried Julius. “It’s an ambush. These guys have got busy
pretty quickly. Push her a bit, George.”

The car fairly leapt forward. Three more shots rang out, but went
happily wide. Julius, upright, leant over the back of the car.

“Nothing to shoot at,” he announced gloomily. “But I guess there’ll be
another little picnic soon. Ah!”

He raised his hand to his cheek.

“You are hurt?” said Annette quickly.

“Only a scratch.”

The girl sprang to her feet.

“Let me out! Let me out, I say! Stop the car. It is me they’re after.
I’m the one they want. You shall not lose your lives because of me. Let
me go.” She was fumbling with the fastenings of the door.

Julius took her by both arms, and looked at her. She had spoken with no
trace of foreign accent.

“Sit down, kid,” he said gently. “I guess there’s nothing wrong with
your memory. Been fooling them all the time, eh?”

The girl looked at him, nodded, and then suddenly burst into tears.
Julius patted her on the shoulder.

“There, there--just you sit tight. We’re not going to let you quit.”

Through her sobs the girl said indistinctly:

“You’re from home. I can tell by your voice. It makes me home-sick.”

“Sure I’m from home. I’m your cousin--Julius Hersheimmer. I came over to
Europe on purpose to find you--and a pretty dance you’ve led me.”

The car slackened speed. George spoke over his shoulder:

“Cross-roads here, sir. I’m not sure of the way.”

The car slowed down till it hardly moved. As it did so a figure climbed
suddenly over the back, and plunged head first into the midst of them.

“Sorry,” said Tommy, extricating himself.

A mass of confused exclamations greeted him. He replied to them
severally:

“Was in the bushes by the drive. Hung on behind. Couldn’t let you know
before at the pace you were going. It was all I could do to hang on. Now
then, you girls, get out!”

“Get out?”

“Yes. There’s a station just up that road. Train due in three minutes.
You’ll catch it if you hurry.”

“What the devil are you driving at?” demanded Julius. “Do you think you
can fool them by leaving the car?”

“You and I aren’t going to leave the car. Only the girls.”

“You’re crazed, Beresford. Stark staring mad! You can’t let those girls
go off alone. It’ll be the end of it if you do.”

Tommy turned to Tuppence.

“Get out at once, Tuppence. Take her with you, and do just as I say.
No one will do you any harm. You’re safe. Take the train to London. Go
straight to Sir James Peel Edgerton. Mr. Carter lives out of town, but
you’ll be safe with him.”

“Darn you!” cried Julius. “You’re mad. Jane, you stay where you are.”

With a sudden swift movement, Tommy snatched the revolver from Julius’s
hand, and levelled it at him.

“Now will you believe I’m in earnest? Get out, both of you, and do as I
say--or I’ll shoot!”

Tuppence sprang out, dragging the unwilling Jane after her.

“Come on, it’s all right. If Tommy’s sure--he’s sure. Be quick. We’ll
miss the train.”

They started running.

Julius’s pent-up rage burst forth.

“What the hell----”

Tommy interrupted him.

“Dry up! I want a few words with you, Mr. Julius Hersheimmer.”



CHAPTER XXV. JANE’S STORY

HER arm through Jane’s, dragging her along, Tuppence reached the
station. Her quick ears caught the sound of the approaching train.

“Hurry up,” she panted, “or we’ll miss it.”

They arrived on the platform just as the train came to a standstill.
Tuppence opened the door of an empty first-class compartment, and the
two girls sank down breathless on the padded seats.

A man looked in, then passed on to the next carriage. Jane started
nervously. Her eyes dilated with terror. She looked questioningly at
Tuppence.

“Is he one of them, do you think?” she breathed.

Tuppence shook her head.

“No, no. It’s all right.” She took Jane’s hand in hers. “Tommy wouldn’t
have told us to do this unless he was sure we’d be all right.”

“But he doesn’t know them as I do!” The girl shivered. “You can’t
understand. Five years! Five long years! Sometimes I thought I should go
mad.”

“Never mind. It’s all over.”

“Is it?”

The train was moving now, speeding through the night at a gradually
increasing rate. Suddenly Jane Finn started up.

“What was that? I thought I saw a face--looking in through the window.”

“No, there’s nothing. See.” Tuppence went to the window, and lifting the
strap let the pane down.

“You’re sure?”

“Quite sure.”

The other seemed to feel some excuse was necessary:

“I guess I’m acting like a frightened rabbit, but I can’t help it. If
they caught me now they’d----” Her eyes opened wide and staring.

“_Don’t!_” implored Tuppence. “Lie back, and _don’t think_. You can be
quite sure that Tommy wouldn’t have said it was safe if it wasn’t.”

“My cousin didn’t think so. He didn’t want us to do this.”

“No,” said Tuppence, rather embarrassed.

“What are you thinking of?” said Jane sharply.

“Why?”

“Your voice was so--queer!”

“I _was_ thinking of something,” confessed Tuppence. “But I don’t want
to tell you--not now. I may be wrong, but I don’t think so. It’s just
an idea that came into my head a long time ago. Tommy’s got it too--I’m
almost sure he has. But don’t _you_ worry--there’ll be time enough for
that later. And it mayn’t be so at all! Do what I tell you--lie back and
don’t think of anything.”

“I’ll try.” The long lashes drooped over the hazel eyes.

Tuppence, for her part, sat bolt upright--much in the attitude of a
watchful terrier on guard. In spite of herself she was nervous. Her eyes
flashed continually from one window to the other. She noted the exact
position of the communication cord. What it was that she feared, she
would have been hard put to it to say. But in her own mind she was
far from feeling the confidence displayed in her words. Not that she
disbelieved in Tommy, but occasionally she was shaken with doubts as to
whether anyone so simple and honest as he was could ever be a match for
the fiendish subtlety of the arch-criminal.

If they once reached Sir James Peel Edgerton in safety, all would be
well. But would they reach him? Would not the silent forces of Mr. Brown
already be assembling against them? Even that last picture of Tommy,
revolver in hand, failed to comfort her. By now he might be overpowered,
borne down by sheer force of numbers.... Tuppence mapped out her plan of
campaign.

As the train at length drew slowly into Charing Cross, Jane Finn sat up
with a start.

“Have we arrived? I never thought we should!”

“Oh, I thought we’d get to London all right. If there’s going to be any
fun, now is when it will begin. Quick, get out. We’ll nip into a taxi.”

In another minute they were passing the barrier, had paid the necessary
fares, and were stepping into a taxi.

“King’s Cross,” directed Tuppence. Then she gave a jump. A man looked in
at the window, just as they started. She was almost certain it was the
same man who had got into the carriage next to them. She had a horrible
feeling of being slowly hemmed in on every side.

“You see,” she explained to Jane, “if they think we’re going to Sir
James, this will put them off the scent. Now they’ll imagine we’re going
to Mr. Carter. His country place is north of London somewhere.”

Crossing Holborn there was a block, and the taxi was held up. This was
what Tuppence had been waiting for.

“Quick,” she whispered. “Open the right-hand door!”

The two girls stepped out into the traffic. Two minutes later they were
seated in another taxi and were retracing their steps, this time direct
to Carlton House Terrace.

“There,” said Tuppence, with great satisfaction, “this ought to do them.
I can’t help thinking that I’m really rather clever! How that other taxi
man will swear! But I took his number, and I’ll send him a postal order
to-morrow, so that he won’t lose by it if he happens to be genuine.
What’s this thing swerving----Oh!”

There was a grinding noise and a bump. Another taxi had collided with
them.

In a flash Tuppence was out on the pavement. A policeman was
approaching. Before he arrived Tuppence had handed the driver five
shillings, and she and Jane had merged themselves in the crowd.

“It’s only a step or two now,” said Tuppence breathlessly. The accident
had taken place in Trafalgar Square.

“Do you think the collision was an accident, or done deliberately?”

“I don’t know. It might have been either.”

Hand-in-hand, the two girls hurried along.

“It may be my fancy,” said Tuppence suddenly, “but I feel as though
there was some one behind us.”

“Hurry!” murmured the other. “Oh, hurry!”

They were now at the corner of Carlton House Terrace, and their spirits
lightened. Suddenly a large and apparently intoxicated man barred their
way.

“Good evening, ladies,” he hiccupped. “Whither away so fast?”

“Let us pass, please,” said Tuppence imperiously.

“Just a word with your pretty friend here.” He stretched out an unsteady
hand, and clutched Jane by the shoulder. Tuppence heard other footsteps
behind. She did not pause to ascertain whether they were friends or
foes. Lowering her head, she repeated a manœuvre of childish days,
and butted their aggressor full in the capacious middle. The success of
these unsportsmanlike tactics was immediate. The man sat down abruptly
on the pavement. Tuppence and Jane took to their heels. The house they
sought was some way down. Other footsteps echoed behind them. Their
breath was coming in choking gasps as they reached Sir James’s door.
Tuppence seized the bell and Jane the knocker.

The man who had stopped them reached the foot of the steps. For a moment
he hesitated, and as he did so the door opened. They fell into the hall
together. Sir James came forward from the library door.

“Hullo! What’s this?”

He stepped forward, and put his arm round Jane as she swayed
uncertainly. He half carried her into the library, and laid her on the
leather couch. From a tantalus on the table he poured out a few drops of
brandy, and forced her to drink them. With a sigh she sat up, her eyes
still wild and frightened.

“It’s all right. Don’t be afraid, my child. You’re quite safe.”

Her breath came more normally, and the colour was returning to her
cheeks. Sir James looked at Tuppence quizzically.

“So you’re not dead, Miss Tuppence, any more than that Tommy boy of
yours was!”

“The Young Adventurers take a lot of killing,” boasted Tuppence.

“So it seems,” said Sir James dryly. “Am I right in thinking that the
joint venture has ended in success, and that this”--he turned to the
girl on the couch--“is Miss Jane Finn?”

Jane sat up.

“Yes,” she said quietly, “I am Jane Finn. I have a lot to tell you.”

“When you are stronger----”

“No--now!” Her voice rose a little. “I shall feel safer when I have told
everything.”

“As you please,” said the lawyer.

He sat down in one of the big arm-chairs facing the couch. In a low
voice Jane began her story.

“I came over on the _Lusitania_ to take up a post in Paris. I was
fearfully keen about the war, and just dying to help somehow or other. I
had been studying French, and my teacher said they were wanting help in
a hospital in Paris, so I wrote and offered my services, and they were
accepted. I hadn’t got any folk of my own, so it made it easy to arrange
things.

“When the _Lusitania_ was torpedoed, a man came up to me. I’d noticed
him more than once--and I’d figured it out in my own mind that he
was afraid of somebody or something. He asked me if I was a patriotic
American, and told me he was carrying papers which were just life or
death to the Allies. He asked me to take charge of them. I was to watch
for an advertisement in the _Times_. If it didn’t appear, I was to take
them to the American Ambassador.

“Most of what followed seems like a nightmare still. I see it in my
dreams sometimes.... I’ll hurry over that part. Mr. Danvers had told me
to watch out. He might have been shadowed from New York, but he didn’t
think so. At first I had no suspicions, but on the boat to Holyhead I
began to get uneasy. There was one woman who had been very keen to look
after me, and chum up with me generally--a Mrs. Vandemeyer. At first I’d
been only grateful to her for being so kind to me; but all the time I
felt there was something about her I didn’t like, and on the Irish
boat I saw her talking to some queer-looking men, and from the way they
looked I saw that they were talking about me. I remembered that she’d
been quite near me on the _Lusitania_ when Mr. Danvers gave me the
packet, and before that she’d tried to talk to him once or twice. I
began to get scared, but I didn’t quite see what to do.

“I had a wild idea of stopping at Holyhead, and not going on to London
that day, but I soon saw that that would be plumb foolishness. The only
thing was to act as though I’d noticed nothing, and hope for the best.
I couldn’t see how they could get me if I was on my guard. One thing
I’d done already as a precaution--ripped open the oilskin packet and
substituted blank paper, and then sewn it up again. So, if anyone did
manage to rob me of it, it wouldn’t matter.

“What to do with the real thing worried me no end. Finally I opened it
out flat--there were only two sheets--and laid it between two of the
advertisement pages of a magazine. I stuck the two pages together
round the edge with some gum off an envelope. I carried the magazine
carelessly stuffed into the pocket of my ulster.

“At Holyhead I tried to get into a carriage with people that looked all
right, but in a queer way there seemed always to be a crowd round me
shoving and pushing me just the way I didn’t want to go. There was
something uncanny and frightening about it. In the end I found myself in
a carriage with Mrs. Vandemeyer after all. I went out into the corridor,
but all the other carriages were full, so I had to go back and sit down.
I consoled myself with the thought that there were other people in the
carriage--there was quite a nice-looking man and his wife sitting just
opposite. So I felt almost happy about it until just outside London. I
had leaned back and closed my eyes. I guess they thought I was asleep,
but my eyes weren’t quite shut, and suddenly I saw the nice-looking man
get something out of his bag and hand it to Mrs. Vandemeyer, and as he
did so he _winked_....

“I can’t tell you how that wink sort of froze me through and through. My
only thought was to get out in the corridor as quick as ever I could. I
got up, trying to look natural and easy. Perhaps they saw something--I
don’t know--but suddenly Mrs. Vandemeyer said ‘Now,’ and flung something
over my nose and mouth as I tried to scream. At the same moment I felt a
terrific blow on the back of my head....”

She shuddered. Sir James murmured something sympathetically. In a minute
she resumed:

“I don’t know how long it was before I came back to consciousness. I
felt very ill and sick. I was lying on a dirty bed. There was a
screen round it, but I could hear two people talking in the room. Mrs.
Vandemeyer was one of them. I tried to listen, but at first I couldn’t
take much in. When at last I did begin to grasp what was going on--I was
just terrified! I wonder I didn’t scream right out there and then.

“They hadn’t found the papers. They’d got the oilskin packet with the
blanks, and they were just mad! They didn’t know whether _I_‘d changed
the papers, or whether Danvers had been carrying a dummy message,
while the real one was sent another way. They spoke of”--she closed her
eyes--“torturing me to find out!

“I’d never known what fear--really sickening fear--was before! Once
they came to look at me. I shut my eyes and pretended to be still
unconscious, but I was afraid they’d hear the beating of my heart.
However, they went away again. I began thinking madly. What could I do?
I knew I wouldn’t be able to stand up against torture very long.

“Suddenly something put the thought of loss of memory into my head. The
subject had always interested me, and I’d read an awful lot about it.
I had the whole thing at my finger-tips. If only I could succeed in
carrying the bluff through, it might save me. I said a prayer, and drew
a long breath. Then I opened my eyes and started babbling in _French!_

“Mrs. Vandemeyer came round the screen at once. Her face was so wicked I
nearly died, but I smiled up at her doubtfully, and asked her in French
where I was.

“It puzzled her, I could see. She called the man she had been talking
to. He stood by the screen with his face in shadow. He spoke to me in
French. His voice was very ordinary and quiet, but somehow, I don’t know
why, he scared me worse than the woman. I felt he’d seen right through
me, but I went on playing my part. I asked again where I was, and
then went on that there was something I _must_ remember--_must_
remember--only for the moment it was all gone. I worked myself up to
be more and more distressed. He asked me my name. I said I didn’t
know--that I couldn’t remember anything at all.

“Suddenly he caught my wrist, and began twisting it. The pain was awful.
I screamed. He went on. I screamed and screamed, but I managed to shriek
out things in French. I don’t know how long I could have gone on, but
luckily I fainted. The last thing I heard was his voice saying: ‘That’s
not bluff! Anyway, a kid of her age wouldn’t know enough.’ I guess he
forgot American girls are older for their age than English ones, and
take more interest in scientific subjects.

“When I came to, Mrs. Vandemeyer was sweet as honey to me. She’d had her
orders, I guess. She spoke to me in French--told me I’d had a shock
and been very ill. I should be better soon. I pretended to be rather
dazed--murmured something about the ‘doctor’ having hurt my wrist. She
looked relieved when I said that.

“By and by she went out of the room altogether. I was suspicious still,
and lay quite quiet for some time. In the end, however, I got up and
walked round the room, examining it. I thought that even if anyone
_was_ watching me from somewhere, it would seem natural enough under
the circumstances. It was a squalid, dirty place. There were no windows,
which seemed queer. I guessed the door would be locked, but I didn’t
try it. There were some battered old pictures on the walls, representing
scenes from _Faust_.”

Jane’s two listeners gave a simultaneous “Ah!” The girl nodded.

“Yes--it was the place in Soho where Mr. Beresford was imprisoned. Of
course, at the time I didn’t even know if I was in London. One thing was
worrying me dreadfully, but my heart gave a great throb of relief when
I saw my ulster lying carelessly over the back of a chair. _And the
magazine was still rolled up in the pocket!_

“If only I could be certain that I was not being overlooked! I looked
carefully round the walls. There didn’t seem to be a peep-hole of any
kind--nevertheless I felt kind of sure there must be. All of a sudden I
sat down on the edge of the table, and put my face in my hands, sobbing
out a ‘Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!’ I’ve got very sharp ears. I distinctly heard
the rustle of a dress, and slight creak. That was enough for me. I was
being watched!

“I lay down on the bed again, and by and by Mrs. Vandemeyer brought me
some supper. She was still sweet as they make them. I guess she’d been
told to win my confidence. Presently she produced the oilskin packet,
and asked me if I recognized it, watching me like a lynx all the time.

“I took it and turned it over in a puzzled sort of way. Then I shook my
head. I said that I felt I _ought_ to remember something about it, that
it was just as though it was all coming back, and then, before I could
get hold of it, it went again. Then she told me that I was her niece,
and that I was to call her ‘Aunt Rita.’ I did obediently, and she told
me not to worry--my memory would soon come back.

“That was an awful night. I’d made my plan whilst I was waiting for her.
The papers were safe so far, but I couldn’t take the risk of leaving
them there any longer. They might throw that magazine away any minute.
I lay awake waiting until I judged it must be about two o’clock in the
morning. Then I got up as softly as I could, and felt in the dark along
the left-hand wall. Very gently, I unhooked one of the pictures from its
nail--Marguerite with her casket of jewels. I crept over to my coat and
took out the magazine, and an odd envelope or two that I had shoved in.
Then I went to the washstand, and damped the brown paper at the back
of the picture all round. Presently I was able to pull it away. I had
already torn out the two stuck-together pages from the magazine, and now
I slipped them with their precious enclosure between the picture and its
brown paper backing. A little gum from the envelopes helped me to
stick the latter up again. No one would dream the picture had ever been
tampered with. I rehung it on the wall, put the magazine back in my
coat pocket, and crept back to bed. I was pleased with my hiding-place.
They’d never think of pulling to pieces one of their own pictures. I
hoped that they’d come to the conclusion that Danvers had been carrying
a dummy all along, and that, in the end, they’d let me go.

“As a matter of fact, I guess that’s what they did think at first, and,
in a way, it was dangerous for me. I learnt afterwards that they nearly
did away with me then and there--there was never much chance of their
‘letting me go’--but the first man, who was the boss, preferred to keep
me alive on the chance of my having hidden them, and being able to tell
where if I recovered my memory. They watched me constantly for weeks.
Sometimes they’d ask me questions by the hour--I guess there was nothing
they didn’t know about the third degree!--but somehow I managed to hold
my own. The strain of it was awful, though....

“They took me back to Ireland, and over every step of the journey again,
in case I’d hidden it somewhere _en route_. Mrs. Vandemeyer and another
woman never left me for a moment. They spoke of me as a young relative
of Mrs. Vandemeyer’s whose mind was affected by the shock of the
_Lusitania_. There was no one I could appeal to for help without
giving myself away to _them_, and if I risked it and failed--and Mrs.
Vandemeyer looked so rich, and so beautifully dressed, that I felt
convinced they’d take her word against mine, and think it was part of my
mental trouble to think myself ‘persecuted’--I felt that the horrors in
store for me would be too awful once they knew I’d been only shamming.”

Sir James nodded comprehendingly.

“Mrs. Vandemeyer was a woman of great personality. With that and her
social position she would have had little difficulty in imposing her
point of view in preference to yours. Your sensational accusations
against her would not easily have found credence.”

“That’s what I thought. It ended in my being sent to a sanatorium at
Bournemouth. I couldn’t make up my mind at first whether it was a sham
affair or genuine. A hospital nurse had charge of me. I was a special
patient. She seemed so nice and normal that at last I determined to
confide in her. A merciful providence just saved me in time from falling
into the trap. My door happened to be ajar, and I heard her talking to
some one in the passage. _She was one of them!_ They still fancied it
might be a bluff on my part, and she was put in charge of me to make
sure! After that, my nerve went completely. I dared trust nobody.

“I think I almost hypnotized myself. After a while, I almost forgot
that I was really Jane Finn. I was so bent on playing the part of Janet
Vandemeyer that my nerves began to play me tricks. I became really
ill--for months I sank into a sort of stupor. I felt sure I should
die soon, and that nothing really mattered. A sane person shut up in a
lunatic asylum often ends by becoming insane, they say. I guess I was
like that. Playing my part had become second nature to me. I wasn’t even
unhappy in the end--just apathetic. Nothing seemed to matter. And the
years went on.

“And then suddenly things seemed to change. Mrs. Vandemeyer came down
from London. She and the doctor asked me questions, experimented with
various treatments. There was some talk of sending me to a specialist in
Paris. In the end, they did not dare risk it. I overheard something that
seemed to show that other people--friends--were looking for me. I
learnt later that the nurse who had looked after me went to Paris,
and consulted a specialist, representing herself to be me. He put her
through some searching tests, and exposed her loss of memory to be
fraudulent; but she had taken a note of his methods and reproduced
them on me. I dare say I couldn’t have deceived the specialist for a
minute--a man who has made a lifelong study of a thing is unique--but
I managed once again to hold my own with them. The fact that I’d not
thought of myself as Jane Finn for so long made it easier.

“One night I was whisked off to London at a moment’s notice. They took
me back to the house in Soho. Once I got away from the sanatorium I felt
different--as though something in me that had been buried for a long
time was waking up again.

“They sent me in to wait on Mr. Beresford. (Of course I didn’t know
his name then.) I was suspicious--I thought it was another trap. But he
looked so honest, I could hardly believe it. However, I was careful in
all I said, for I knew we could be overheard. There’s a small hole, high
up in the wall.

“But on the Sunday afternoon a message was brought to the house. They
were all very disturbed. Without their knowing, I listened. Word had
come that he was to be killed. I needn’t tell the next part, because
you know it. I thought I’d have time to rush up and get the papers from
their hiding-place, but I was caught. So I screamed out that he was
escaping, and I said I wanted to go back to Marguerite. I shouted the
name three times very loud. I knew the others would think I meant
Mrs. Vandemeyer, but I hoped it might make Mr. Beresford think of the
picture. He’d unhooked one the first day--that’s what made me hesitate
to trust him.”

She paused.

“Then the papers,” said Sir James slowly, “are still at the back of the
picture in that room.”

“Yes.” The girl had sunk back on the sofa exhausted with the strain of
the long story.

Sir James rose to his feet. He looked at his watch.

“Come,” he said, “we must go at once.”

“To-night?” queried Tuppence, surprised.

“To-morrow may be too late,” said Sir James gravely. “Besides, by
going to-night we have the chance of capturing that great man and
super-criminal--Mr. Brown!”

There was dead silence, and Sir James continued:

“You have been followed here--not a doubt of it. When we leave the house
we shall be followed again, but not molested, _for it is Mr. Brown’s
plan that we are to lead him_. But the Soho house is under police
supervision night and day. There are several men watching it. When we
enter that house, Mr. Brown will not draw back--he will risk all, on the
chance of obtaining the spark to fire his mine. And he fancies the risk
not great--since he will enter in the guise of a friend!”

Tuppence flushed, then opened her mouth impulsively.

“But there’s something you don’t know--that we haven’t told you.” Her
eyes dwelt on Jane in perplexity.

“What is that?” asked the other sharply. “No hesitations, Miss Tuppence.
We need to be sure of our going.”

But Tuppence, for once, seemed tongue-tied.

“It’s so difficult--you see, if I’m wrong--oh, it would be dreadful.”
 She made a grimace at the unconscious Jane. “Never forgive me,” she
observed cryptically.

“You want me to help you out, eh?”

“Yes, please. _You_ know who Mr. Brown is, don’t you?”

“Yes,” said Sir James gravely. “At last I do.”

“At last?” queried Tuppence doubtfully. “Oh, but I thought----” She
paused.

“You thought correctly, Miss Tuppence. I have been morally certain of
his identity for some time--ever since the night of Mrs. Vandemeyer’s
mysterious death.”

“Ah!” breathed Tuppence.

“For there we are up against the logic of facts. There are only two
solutions. Either the chloral was administered by her own hand, which
theory I reject utterly, or else----”

“Yes?”

“Or else it was administered in the brandy you gave her. Only three
people touched that brandy--you, Miss Tuppence, I myself, and one
other--Mr. Julius Hersheimmer!”

Jane Finn stirred and sat up, regarding the speaker with wide astonished
eyes.

“At first, the thing seemed utterly impossible. Mr. Hersheimmer, as the
son of a prominent millionaire, was a well-known figure in America. It
seemed utterly impossible that he and Mr. Brown could be one and the
same. But you cannot escape from the logic of facts. Since the thing
was so--it must be accepted. Remember Mrs. Vandemeyer’s sudden and
inexplicable agitation. Another proof, if proof was needed.

“I took an early opportunity of giving you a hint. From some words of
Mr. Hersheimmer’s at Manchester, I gathered that you had understood and
acted on that hint. Then I set to work to prove the impossible possible.
Mr. Beresford rang me up and told me, what I had already suspected,
that the photograph of Miss Jane Finn had never really been out of Mr.
Hersheimmer’s possession----”

But the girl interrupted. Springing to her feet, she cried out angrily:

“What do you mean? What are you trying to suggest? That Mr. Brown is
_Julius?_ Julius--my own cousin!”

“No, Miss Finn,” said Sir James unexpectedly. “Not your cousin. The man
who calls himself Julius Hersheimmer is no relation to you whatsoever.”



CHAPTER XXVI. MR. BROWN

SIR James’s words came like a bomb-shell. Both girls looked equally
puzzled. The lawyer went across to his desk, and returned with a small
newspaper cutting, which he handed to Jane. Tuppence read it over
her shoulder. Mr. Carter would have recognized it. It referred to the
mysterious man found dead in New York.

“As I was saying to Miss Tuppence,” resumed the lawyer, “I set to work
to prove the impossible possible. The great stumbling-block was the
undeniable fact that Julius Hersheimmer was not an assumed name. When I
came across this paragraph my problem was solved. Julius Hersheimmer set
out to discover what had become of his cousin. He went out West, where
he obtained news of her and her photograph to aid him in his search. On
the eve of his departure from New York he was set upon and murdered. His
body was dressed in shabby clothes, and the face disfigured to prevent
identification. Mr. Brown took his place. He sailed immediately for
England. None of the real Hersheimmer’s friends or intimates saw him
before he sailed--though indeed it would hardly have mattered if they
had, the impersonation was so perfect. Since then he had been hand and
glove with those sworn to hunt him down. Every secret of theirs has been
known to him. Only once did he come near disaster. Mrs. Vandemeyer knew
his secret. It was no part of his plan that that huge bribe should ever
be offered to her. But for Miss Tuppence’s fortunate change of plan, she
would have been far away from the flat when we arrived there. Exposure
stared him in the face. He took a desperate step, trusting in his
assumed character to avert suspicion. He nearly succeeded--but not
quite.”

“I can’t believe it,” murmured Jane. “He seemed so splendid.”

“The real Julius Hersheimmer _was_ a splendid fellow! And Mr. Brown is
a consummate actor. But ask Miss Tuppence if she also has not had her
suspicions.”

Jane turned mutely to Tuppence. The latter nodded.

“I didn’t want to say it, Jane--I knew it would hurt you. And, after
all, I couldn’t be sure. I still don’t understand why, if he’s Mr.
Brown, he rescued us.”

“Was it Julius Hersheimmer who helped you to escape?”

Tuppence recounted to Sir James the exciting events of the evening,
ending up: “But I can’t see _why!_”

“Can’t you? I can. So can young Beresford, by his actions. As a last
hope Jane Finn was to be allowed to escape--and the escape must be
managed so that she harbours no suspicions of its being a put-up job.
They’re not averse to young Beresford’s being in the neighbourhood, and,
if necessary, communicating with you. They’ll take care to get him out
of the way at the right minute. Then Julius Hersheimmer dashes up and
rescues you in true melodramatic style. Bullets fly--but don’t hit
anybody. What would have happened next? You would have driven straight
to the house in Soho and secured the document which Miss Finn would
probably have entrusted to her cousin’s keeping. Or, if he conducted the
search, he would have pretended to find the hiding-place already rifled.
He would have had a dozen ways of dealing with the situation, but the
result would have been the same. And I rather fancy some accident would
have happened to both of you. You see, you know rather an inconvenient
amount. That’s a rough outline. I admit I was caught napping; but
somebody else wasn’t.”

“Tommy,” said Tuppence softly.

“Yes. Evidently when the right moment came to get rid of him--he was too
sharp for them. All the same, I’m not too easy in my mind about him.”

“Why?”

“Because Julius Hersheimmer is Mr. Brown,” said Sir James dryly. “And it
takes more than one man and a revolver to hold up Mr. Brown....”

Tuppence paled a little.

“What can we do?”

“Nothing until we’ve been to the house in Soho. If Beresford has still
got the upper hand, there’s nothing to fear. If otherwise, our enemy
will come to find us, and he will not find us unprepared!” From a drawer
in the desk, he took a service revolver, and placed it in his coat
pocket.

“Now we’re ready. I know better than even to suggest going without you,
Miss Tuppence----”

“I should think so indeed!”

“But I do suggest that Miss Finn should remain here. She will be
perfectly safe, and I am afraid she is absolutely worn out with all she
has been through.”

But to Tuppence’s surprise Jane shook her head.

“No. I guess I’m going too. Those papers were my trust. I must go
through with this business to the end. I’m heaps better now anyway.”

Sir James’s car was ordered round. During the short drive Tuppence’s
heart beat tumultuously. In spite of momentary qualms of uneasiness
respecting Tommy, she could not but feel exultation. They were going to
win!

The car drew up at the corner of the square and they got out. Sir James
went up to a plain-clothes man who was on duty with several others, and
spoke to him. Then he rejoined the girls.

“No one has gone into the house so far. It is being watched at the back
as well, so they are quite sure of that. Anyone who attempts to enter
after we have done so will be arrested immediately. Shall we go in?”

A policeman produced a key. They all knew Sir James well. They had also
had orders respecting Tuppence. Only the third member of the party was
unknown to them. The three entered the house, pulling the door to behind
them. Slowly they mounted the rickety stairs. At the top was the ragged
curtain hiding the recess where Tommy had hidden that day. Tuppence had
heard the story from Jane in her character of “Annette.” She looked at
the tattered velvet with interest. Even now she could almost swear it
moved--as though _some one_ was behind it. So strong was the illusion
that she almost fancied she could make out the outline of a form....
Supposing Mr. Brown--Julius--was there waiting....

Impossible of course! Yet she almost went back to put the curtain aside
and make sure....

Now they were entering the prison room. No place for anyone to hide
here, thought Tuppence, with a sigh of relief, then chided herself
indignantly. She must not give way to this foolish fancying--this
curious insistent feeling that _Mr. Brown was in the house_.... Hark!
what was that? A stealthy footstep on the stairs? There _was_ some one
in the house! Absurd! She was becoming hysterical.

Jane had gone straight to the picture of Marguerite. She unhooked it
with a steady hand. The dust lay thick upon it, and festoons of cobwebs
lay between it and the wall. Sir James handed her a pocket-knife, and
she ripped away the brown paper from the back.... The advertisement
page of a magazine fell out. Jane picked it up. Holding apart the frayed
inner edges she extracted two thin sheets covered with writing!

No dummy this time! The real thing!

“We’ve got it,” said Tuppence. “At last....”

The moment was almost breathless in its emotion. Forgotten the faint
creakings, the imagined noises of a minute ago. None of them had eyes
for anything but what Jane held in her hand.

Sir James took it, and scrutinized it attentively.

“Yes,” he said quietly, “this is the ill-fated draft treaty!”

“We’ve succeeded,” said Tuppence. There was awe and an almost wondering
unbelief in her voice.

Sir James echoed her words as he folded the paper carefully and put it
away in his pocket-book, then he looked curiously round the dingy room.

“It was here that our young friend was confined for so long, was
it not?” he said. “A truly sinister room. You notice the absence of
windows, and the thickness of the close-fitting door. Whatever took
place here would never be heard by the outside world.”

Tuppence shivered. His words woke a vague alarm in her. What if there
_was_ some one concealed in the house? Some one who might bar that door
on them, and leave them to die like rats in a trap? Then she realized
the absurdity of her thought. The house was surrounded by police who,
if they failed to reappear, would not hesitate to break in and make a
thorough search. She smiled at her own foolishness--then looked up with
a start to find Sir James watching her. He gave her an emphatic little
nod.

“Quite right, Miss Tuppence. You scent danger. So do I. So does Miss
Finn.”

“Yes,” admitted Jane. “It’s absurd--but I can’t help it.”

Sir James nodded again.

“You feel--as we all feel-- _the presence of Mr. Bown_. Yes”--as
Tuppence made a movement--“not a doubt of it-- _Mr. Brown is here_....”

“In this house?”

“In this room.... You don’t understand? _I am Mr. Brown_....”

Stupefied, unbelieving, they stared at him. The very lines of his face
had changed. It was a different man who stood before them. He smiled a
slow cruel smile.

“Neither of you will leave this room alive! You said just now we had
succeeded. _I_ have succeeded! The draft treaty is mine.” His smile grew
wider as he looked at Tuppence. “Shall I tell you how it will be? Sooner
or later the police will break in, and they will find three victims of
Mr. Brown--three, not two, you understand, but fortunately the third
will not be dead, only wounded, and will be able to describe the attack
with a wealth of detail! The treaty? It is in the hands of Mr. Brown. So
no one will think of searching the pockets of Sir James Peel Edgerton!”

He turned to Jane.

“You outwitted me. I make my acknowledgments. But you will not do it
again.”

There was a faint sound behind him, but, intoxicated with success, he
did not turn his head.

He slipped his hand into his pocket.

“Checkmate to the Young Adventurers,” he said, and slowly raised the big
automatic.

But, even as he did so, he felt himself seized from behind in a grip of
iron. The revolver was wrenched from his hand, and the voice of Julius
Hersheimmer said drawlingly:

“I guess you’re caught redhanded with the goods upon you.”

The blood rushed to the K.C.’s face, but his self-control was
marvellous, as he looked from one to the other of his two captors. He
looked longest at Tommy.

“You,” he said beneath his breath. “_You!_ I might have known.”

Seeing that he was disposed to offer no resistance, their grip
slackened. Quick as a flash his left hand, the hand which bore the big
signet ring, was raised to his lips....

“‘_Ave, Cæsar! te morituri salutant_,’” he said, still looking at
Tommy.

Then his face changed, and with a long convulsive shudder he fell
forward in a crumpled heap, whilst an odour of bitter almonds filled the
air.



CHAPTER XXVII. A SUPPER PARTY AT THE _SAVOY_

THE supper party given by Mr. Julius Hersheimmer to a few friends on the
evening of the 30th will long be remembered in catering circles. It took
place in a private room, and Mr. Hersheimmer’s orders were brief and
forcible. He gave carte blanche--and when a millionaire gives carte
blanche he usually gets it!

Every delicacy out of season was duly provided. Waiters carried bottles
of ancient and royal vintage with loving care. The floral decorations
defied the seasons, and fruits of the earth as far apart as May and
November found themselves miraculously side by side. The list of guests
was small and select. The American Ambassador, Mr. Carter, who had taken
the liberty, he said, of bringing an old friend, Sir William Beresford,
with him, Archdeacon Cowley, Dr. Hall, those two youthful adventurers,
Miss Prudence Cowley and Mr. Thomas Beresford, and last, but not least,
as guest of honour, Miss Jane Finn.

Julius had spared no pains to make Jane’s appearance a success. A
mysterious knock had brought Tuppence to the door of the apartment she
was sharing with the American girl. It was Julius. In his hand he held a
cheque.

“Say, Tuppence,” he began, “will you do me a good turn? Take this, and
get Jane regularly togged up for this evening. You’re all coming to
supper with me at the _Savoy_. See? Spare no expense. You get me?”

“Sure thing,” mimicked Tuppence. “We shall enjoy ourselves. It will be a
pleasure dressing Jane. She’s the loveliest thing I’ve ever seen.”

“That’s so,” agreed Mr. Hersheimmer fervently.

His fervour brought a momentary twinkle to Tuppence’s eye.

“By the way, Julius,” she remarked demurely, “I--haven’t given you my
answer yet.”

“Answer?” said Julius. His face paled.

“You know--when you asked me to--marry you,” faltered Tuppence, her
eyes downcast in the true manner of the early Victorian heroine, “and
wouldn’t take no for an answer. I’ve thought it well over----”

“Yes?” said Julius. The perspiration stood on his forehead.

Tuppence relented suddenly.

“You great idiot!” she said. “What on earth induced you to do it? I
could see at the time you didn’t care a twopenny dip for me!”

“Not at all. I had--and still have--the highest sentiments of esteem and
respect--and admiration for you----”

“H’m!” said Tuppence. “Those are the kind of sentiments that very soon
go to the wall when the other sentiment comes along! Don’t they, old
thing?”

“I don’t know what you mean,” said Julius stiffly, but a large and
burning blush overspread his countenance.

“Shucks!” retorted Tuppence. She laughed, and closed the door, reopening
it to add with dignity: “Morally, I shall always consider I have been
jilted!”

“What was it?” asked Jane as Tuppence rejoined her.

“Julius.”

“What did he want?”

“Really, I think, he wanted to see you, but I wasn’t going to let him.
Not until to-night, when you’re going to burst upon every one like King
Solomon in his glory! Come on! _We’re going to shop!_”

To most people the 29th, the much-heralded “Labour Day,” had passed much
as any other day. Speeches were made in the Park and Trafalgar Square.
Straggling processions, singing the _Red Flag_, wandered through the
streets in a more or less aimless manner. Newspapers which had hinted at
a general strike, and the inauguration of a reign of terror, were forced
to hide their diminished heads. The bolder and more astute among
them sought to prove that peace had been effected by following their
counsels. In the Sunday papers a brief notice of the sudden death of Sir
James Peel Edgerton, the famous K.C., had appeared. Monday’s paper
dealt appreciatively with the dead man’s career. The exact manner of his
sudden death was never made public.

Tommy had been right in his forecast of the situation. It had been a
one-man show. Deprived of their chief, the organization fell to pieces.
Kramenin had made a precipitate return to Russia, leaving England early
on Sunday morning. The gang had fled from Astley Priors in a panic,
leaving behind, in their haste, various damaging documents which
compromised them hopelessly. With these proofs of conspiracy in their
hands, aided further by a small brown diary taken from the pocket of the
dead man which had contained a full and damning résumé of the whole
plot, the Government had called an eleventh-hour conference. The Labour
leaders were forced to recognize that they had been used as a cat’s
paw. Certain concessions were made by the Government, and were eagerly
accepted. It was to be Peace, not War!

But the Cabinet knew by how narrow a margin they had escaped utter
disaster. And burnt in on Mr. Carter’s brain was the strange scene which
had taken place in the house in Soho the night before.

He had entered the squalid room to find that great man, the friend of
a lifetime, dead--betrayed out of his own mouth. From the dead man’s
pocket-book he had retrieved the ill-omened draft treaty, and then
and there, in the presence of the other three, it had been reduced to
ashes.... England was saved!

And now, on the evening of the 30th, in a private room at the _Savoy_,
Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer was receiving his guests.

Mr. Carter was the first to arrive. With him was a choleric-looking old
gentleman, at sight of whom Tommy flushed up to the roots of his hair.
He came forward.

“Ha!” said the old gentleman, surveying him apoplectically. “So you’re
my nephew, are you? Not much to look at--but you’ve done good work, it
seems. Your mother must have brought you up well after all. Shall we
let bygones be bygones, eh? You’re my heir, you know; and in future I
propose to make you an allowance--and you can look upon Chalmers Park as
your home.”

“Thank you, sir, it’s awfully decent of you.”

“Where’s this young lady I’ve been hearing such a lot about?”

Tommy introduced Tuppence.

“Ha!” said Sir William, eyeing her. “Girls aren’t what they used to be
in my young days.”

“Yes, they are,” said Tuppence. “Their clothes are different, perhaps,
but they themselves are just the same.”

“Well, perhaps you’re right. Minxes then--minxes now!”

“That’s it,” said Tuppence. “I’m a frightful minx myself.”

“I believe you,” said the old gentleman, chuckling, and pinched her ear
in high good-humour. Most young women were terrified of the “old bear,”
 as they termed him. Tuppence’s pertness delighted the old misogynist.

Then came the timid archdeacon, a little bewildered by the company in
which he found himself, glad that his daughter was considered to have
distinguished herself, but unable to help glancing at her from time
to time with nervous apprehension. But Tuppence behaved admirably. She
forbore to cross her legs, set a guard upon her tongue, and steadfastly
refused to smoke.

Dr. Hall came next, and he was followed by the American Ambassador.

“We might as well sit down,” said Julius, when he had introduced all his
guests to each other. “Tuppence, will you----”

He indicated the place of honour with a wave of his hand.

But Tuppence shook her head.

“No--that’s Jane’s place! When one thinks of how she’s held out all
these years, she ought to be made the queen of the feast to-night.”

Julius flung her a grateful glance, and Jane came forward shyly to the
allotted seat. Beautiful as she had seemed before, it was as nothing to
the loveliness that now went fully adorned. Tuppence had performed her
part faithfully. The model gown supplied by a famous dressmaker had been
entitled “A tiger lily.” It was all golds and reds and browns, and out
of it rose the pure column of the girl’s white throat, and the bronze
masses of hair that crowned her lovely head. There was admiration in
every eye, as she took her seat.

Soon the supper party was in full swing, and with one accord Tommy was
called upon for a full and complete explanation.

“You’ve been too darned close about the whole business,” Julius accused
him. “You let on to me that you were off to the Argentine--though I
guess you had your reasons for that. The idea of both you and Tuppence
casting me for the part of Mr. Brown just tickles me to death!”

“The idea was not original to them,” said Mr. Carter gravely. “It was
suggested, and the poison very carefully instilled, by a past-master in
the art. The paragraph in the New York paper suggested the plan to him,
and by means of it he wove a web that nearly enmeshed you fatally.”

“I never liked him,” said Julius. “I felt from the first that there was
something wrong about him, and I always suspected that it was he who
silenced Mrs. Vandemeyer so appositely. But it wasn’t till I heard that
the order for Tommy’s execution came right on the heels of our interview
with him that Sunday that I began to tumble to the fact that he was the
big bug himself.”

“I never suspected it at all,” lamented Tuppence. “I’ve always thought
I was so much cleverer than Tommy--but he’s undoubtedly scored over me
handsomely.”

Julius agreed.

“Tommy’s been the goods this trip! And, instead of sitting there as dumb
as a fish, let him banish his blushes, and tell us all about it.”

“Hear! hear!”

“There’s nothing to tell,” said Tommy, acutely uncomfortable. “I was an
awful mug--right up to the time I found that photograph of Annette, and
realized that she was Jane Finn. Then I remembered how persistently she
had shouted out that word ‘Marguerite’--and I thought of the pictures,
and--well, that’s that. Then of course I went over the whole thing to
see where I’d made an ass of myself.”

“Go on,” said Mr. Carter, as Tommy showed signs of taking refuge in
silence once more.

“That business about Mrs. Vandemeyer had worried me when Julius told me
about it. On the face of it, it seemed that he or Sir James must have
done the trick. But I didn’t know which. Finding that photograph in the
drawer, after that story of how it had been got from him by Inspector
Brown, made me suspect Julius. Then I remembered that it was Sir James
who had discovered the false Jane Finn. In the end, I couldn’t make up
my mind--and just decided to take no chances either way. I left a note
for Julius, in case he was Mr. Brown, saying I was off to the Argentine,
and I dropped Sir James’s letter with the offer of the job by the desk
so that he would see it was a genuine stunt. Then I wrote my letter to
Mr. Carter and rang up Sir James. Taking him into my confidence would
be the best thing either way, so I told him everything except where I
believed the papers to be hidden. The way he helped me to get on the
track of Tuppence and Annette almost disarmed me, but not quite. I kept
my mind open between the two of them. And then I got a bogus note from
Tuppence--and I knew!”

“But how?”

Tommy took the note in question from his pocket and passed it round the
table.

“It’s her handwriting all right, but I knew it wasn’t from her because
of the signature. She’d never spell her name ‘Twopence,’ but anyone
who’d never seen it written might quite easily do so. Julius _had_ seen
it--he showed me a note of hers to him once--but _Sir James hadn’t!_
After that everything was plain sailing. I sent off Albert post-haste to
Mr. Carter. I pretended to go away, but doubled back again. When Julius
came bursting up in his car, I felt it wasn’t part of Mr. Brown’s
plan--and that there would probably be trouble. Unless Sir James was
actually caught in the act, so to speak, I knew Mr. Carter would never
believe it of him on my bare word----”

“I didn’t,” interposed Mr. Carter ruefully.

“That’s why I sent the girls off to Sir James. I was sure they’d fetch
up at the house in Soho sooner or later. I threatened Julius with the
revolver, because I wanted Tuppence to repeat that to Sir James, so that
he wouldn’t worry about us. The moment the girls were out of sight I
told Julius to drive like hell for London, and as we went along I told
him the whole story. We got to the Soho house in plenty of time and met
Mr. Carter outside. After arranging things with him we went in and hid
behind the curtain in the recess. The policemen had orders to say, if
they were asked, that no one had gone into the house. That’s all.”

And Tommy came to an abrupt halt.

There was silence for a moment.

“By the way,” said Julius suddenly, “you’re all wrong about that
photograph of Jane. It _was_ taken from me, but I found it again.”

“Where?” cried Tuppence.

“In that little safe on the wall in Mrs. Vandemeyer’s bedroom.”

“I knew you found something,” said Tuppence reproachfully. “To tell you
the truth, that’s what started me off suspecting you. Why didn’t you
say?”

“I guess I was a mite suspicious too. It had been got away from me once,
and I determined I wouldn’t let on I’d got it until a photographer had
made a dozen copies of it!”

“We all kept back something or other,” said Tuppence thoughtfully. “I
suppose secret service work makes you like that!”

In the pause that ensued, Mr. Carter took from his pocket a small shabby
brown book.

“Beresford has just said that I would not have believed Sir James Peel
Edgerton to be guilty unless, so to speak, he was caught in the act.
That is so. Indeed, not until I read the entries in this little book
could I bring myself fully to credit the amazing truth. This book will
pass into the possession of Scotland Yard, but it will never be publicly
exhibited. Sir James’s long association with the law would make it
undesirable. But to you, who know the truth, I propose to read certain
passages which will throw some light on the extraordinary mentality of
this great man.”

He opened the book, and turned the thin pages.

“... It is madness to keep this book. I know that. It is documentary
evidence against me. But I have never shrunk from taking risks. And I
feel an urgent need for self-expression.... The book will only be taken
from my dead body....

“... From an early age I realized that I had exceptional abilities. Only
a fool underestimates his capabilities. My brain power was greatly above
the average. I know that I was born to succeed. My appearance was
the only thing against me. I was quiet and insignificant--utterly
nondescript....

“... When I was a boy I heard a famous murder trial. I was deeply
impressed by the power and eloquence of the counsel for the defence.
For the first time I entertained the idea of taking my talents to that
particular market.... Then I studied the criminal in the dock.... The
man was a fool--he had been incredibly, unbelievably stupid. Even
the eloquence of his counsel was hardly likely to save him. I felt
an immeasurable contempt for him.... Then it occurred to me that the
criminal standard was a low one. It was the wastrels, the failures, the
general riff-raff of civilization who drifted into crime....
Strange that men of brains had never realized its extraordinary
opportunities.... I played with the idea.... What a magnificent
field--what unlimited possibilities! It made my brain reel....

“... I read standard works on crime and criminals. They all confirmed my
opinion. Degeneracy, disease--never the deliberate embracing of a career
by a far-seeing man. Then I considered. Supposing my utmost ambitions
were realized--that I was called to the bar, and rose to the height of
my profession? That I entered politics--say, even, that I became Prime
Minister of England? What then? Was that power? Hampered at every turn
by my colleagues, fettered by the democratic system of which I should
be the mere figurehead! No--the power I dreamed of was absolute! An
autocrat! A dictator! And such power could only be obtained by working
outside the law. To play on the weaknesses of human nature, then on the
weaknesses of nations--to get together and control a vast organization,
and finally to overthrow the existing order, and rule! The thought
intoxicated me....

“... I saw that I must lead two lives. A man like myself is bound to
attract notice. I must have a successful career which would mask my true
activities.... Also I must cultivate a personality. I modelled myself
upon famous K.C.’s. I reproduced their mannerisms, their magnetism. If I
had chosen to be an actor, I should have been the greatest actor living!
No disguises--no grease paint--no false beards! Personality! I put it
on like a glove! When I shed it, I was myself, quiet, unobtrusive, a man
like every other man. I called myself Mr. Brown. There are hundreds of
men called Brown--there are hundreds of men looking just like me....

“... I succeeded in my false career. I was bound to succeed. I shall
succeed in the other. A man like me cannot fail....

“... I have been reading a life of Napoleon. He and I have much in
common....

“... I make a practice of defending criminals. A man should look after
his own people....

“... Once or twice I have felt afraid. The first time was in Italy.
There was a dinner given. Professor D----, the great alienist, was
present. The talk fell on insanity. He said, ‘A great many men are
mad, and no one knows it. They do not know it themselves.’ I do not
understand why he looked at me when he said that. His glance was
strange.... I did not like it....

“... The war has disturbed me.... I thought it would further my plans.
The Germans are so efficient. Their spy system, too, was excellent.
The streets are full of these boys in khaki. All empty-headed young
fools.... Yet I do not know.... They won the war.... It disturbs me....

“... My plans are going well.... A girl butted in--I do not think she
really knew anything.... But we must give up the Esthonia.... No risks
now....

“.... All goes well. The loss of memory is vexing. It cannot be a fake.
No girl could deceive ME!...

“...The 29th.... That is very soon....” Mr. Carter paused.

“I will not read the details of the _coup_ that was planned. But there
are just two small entries that refer to the three of you. In the light
of what happened they are interesting.

“... By inducing the girl to come to me of her own accord, I have
succeeded in disarming her. But she has intuitive flashes that might be
dangerous.... She must be got out of the way.... I can do nothing with
the American. He suspects and dislikes me. But he cannot know. I fancy
my armour is impregnable.... Sometimes I fear I have underestimated
the other boy. He is not clever, but it is hard to blind his eyes to
facts....”

Mr. Carter shut the book.

“A great man,” he said. “Genius, or insanity, who can say?”

There was silence.

Then Mr. Carter rose to his feet.

“I will give you a toast. The Joint Venture which has so amply justified
itself by success!”

It was drunk with acclamation.

“There’s something more we want to hear,” continued Mr. Carter. He
looked at the American Ambassador. “I speak for you also, I know. We’ll
ask Miss Jane Finn to tell us the story that only Miss Tuppence has
heard so far--but before we do so we’ll drink her health. The health of
one of the bravest of America’s daughters, to whom is due the thanks and
gratitude of two great countries!”



CHAPTER XXVIII. AND AFTER

“THAT was a mighty good toast, Jane,” said Mr. Hersheimmer, as he and
his cousin were being driven back in the Rolls-Royce to the _Ritz_.

“The one to the joint venture?”

“No--the one to you. There isn’t another girl in the world who could
have carried it through as you did. You were just wonderful!”

Jane shook her head.

“I don’t feel wonderful. At heart I’m just tired and lonesome--and
longing for my own country.”

“That brings me to something I wanted to say. I heard the Ambassador
telling you his wife hoped you would come to them at the Embassy right
away. That’s good enough, but I’ve got another plan. Jane--I want you to
marry me! Don’t get scared and say no at once. You can’t love me right
away, of course, that’s impossible. But I’ve loved you from the very
moment I set eyes on your photo--and now I’ve seen you I’m simply crazy
about you! If you’ll only marry me, I won’t worry you any--you shall
take your own time. Maybe you’ll never come to love me, and if that’s
the case I’ll manage to set you free. But I want the right to look after
you, and take care of you.”

“That’s what I want,” said the girl wistfully. “Some one who’ll be good
to me. Oh, you don’t know how lonesome I feel!”

“Sure thing I do. Then I guess that’s all fixed up, and I’ll see the
archbishop about a special license to-morrow morning.”

“Oh, Julius!”

“Well, I don’t want to hustle you any, Jane, but there’s no sense in
waiting about. Don’t be scared--I shan’t expect you to love me all at
once.”

But a small hand was slipped into his.

“I love you now, Julius,” said Jane Finn. “I loved you that first moment
in the car when the bullet grazed your cheek....”

Five minutes later Jane murmured softly:

“I don’t know London very well, Julius, but is it such a very long way
from the _Savoy_ to the _Ritz?_”

“It depends how you go,” explained Julius unblushingly. “We’re going by
way of Regent’s Park!”

“Oh, Julius--what will the chauffeur think?”

“At the wages I pay him, he knows better than to do any independent
thinking. Why, Jane, the only reason I had the supper at the _Savoy_ was
so that I could drive you home. I didn’t see how I was ever going to
get hold of you alone. You and Tuppence have been sticking together
like Siamese twins. I guess another day of it would have driven me and
Beresford stark staring mad!”

“Oh. Is he----?”

“Of course he is. Head over ears.”

“I thought so,” said Jane thoughtfully.

“Why?”

“From all the things Tuppence didn’t say!”

“There you have me beat,” said Mr. Hersheimmer. But Jane only laughed.

In the meantime, the Young Adventurers were sitting bolt upright,
very stiff and ill at ease, in a taxi which, with a singular lack of
originality, was also returning to the _Ritz_ via Regent’s Park.

A terrible constraint seemed to have settled down between them. Without
quite knowing what had happened, everything seemed changed. They were
tongue-tied--paralysed. All the old _camaraderie_ was gone.

Tuppence could think of nothing to say.

Tommy was equally afflicted.

They sat very straight and forbore to look at each other.

At last Tuppence made a desperate effort.

“Rather fun, wasn’t it?”

“Rather.”

Another silence.

“I like Julius,” essayed Tuppence again.

Tommy was suddenly galvanized into life.

“You’re not going to marry him, do you hear?” he said dictatorially. “I
forbid it.”

“Oh!” said Tuppence meekly.

“Absolutely, you understand.”

“He doesn’t want to marry me--he really only asked me out of kindness.”

“That’s not very likely,” scoffed Tommy.

“It’s quite true. He’s head over ears in love with Jane. I expect he’s
proposing to her now.”

“She’ll do for him very nicely,” said Tommy condescendingly.

“Don’t you think she’s the most lovely creature you’ve ever seen?”

“Oh, I dare say.”

“But I suppose you prefer sterling worth,” said Tuppence demurely.

“I--oh, dash it all, Tuppence, you know!”

“I like your uncle, Tommy,” said Tuppence, hastily creating a diversion.
“By the way, what are you going to do, accept Mr. Carter’s offer of
a Government job, or accept Julius’s invitation and take a richly
remunerated post in America on his ranch?”

“I shall stick to the old ship, I think, though it’s awfully good of
Hersheimmer. But I feel you’d be more at home in London.”

“I don’t see where I come in.”

“I do,” said Tommy positively.

Tuppence stole a glance at him sideways.

“There’s the money, too,” she observed thoughtfully.

“What money?”

“We’re going to get a cheque each. Mr. Carter told me so.”

“Did you ask how much?” inquired Tommy sarcastically.

“Yes,” said Tuppence triumphantly. “But I shan’t tell you.”

“Tuppence, you are the limit!”

“It has been fun, hasn’t it, Tommy? I do hope we shall have lots more
adventures.”

“You’re insatiable, Tuppence. I’ve had quite enough adventures for the
present.”

“Well, shopping is almost as good,” said Tuppence dreamily. “Think of
buying old furniture, and bright carpets, and futurist silk curtains,
and a polished dining-table, and a divan with lots of cushions.”

“Hold hard,” said Tommy. “What’s all this for?”

“Possibly a house--but I think a flat.”

“Whose flat?”

“You think I mind saying it, but I don’t in the least! _Ours_, so
there!”

“You darling!” cried Tommy, his arms tightly round her. “I was
determined to make you say it. I owe you something for the relentless
way you’ve squashed me whenever I’ve tried to be sentimental.”

Tuppence raised her face to his. The taxi proceeded on its course round
the north side of Regent’s Park.

“You haven’t really proposed now,” pointed out Tuppence. “Not what our
grandmothers would call a proposal. But after listening to a rotten one
like Julius’s, I’m inclined to let you off.”

“You won’t be able to get out of marrying me, so don’t you think it.”

“What fun it will be,” responded Tuppence. “Marriage is called all sorts
of things, a haven, and a refuge, and a crowning glory, and a state of
bondage, and lots more. But do you know what I think it is?”

“What?”

“A sport!”

“And a damned good sport too,” said Tommy.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET ADVERSARY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Secret of Chimneys
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Secret of Chimneys

Author: Agatha Christie

Release date: May 3, 2021 [eBook #65238]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Mark C. Orton, Shaun Mudd and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET OF CHIMNEYS ***

    AGATHA
    CHRISTIE




    The Secret
    of Chimneys


    THE SECRET OF CHIMNEYS
    Copyright © 1925 by Dodd, Mead & Company, Inc.




    TO
    PUNKIE




Contents


    1 ANTHONY CADE SIGNS ON      _1_

    2 A LADY IN DISTRESS      _11_

    3 ANXIETY IN HIGH PLACES      _20_

    4 INTRODUCING A VERY CHARMING LADY      _27_

    5 FIRST NIGHT IN LONDON      _33_

    6 THE GENTLE ART OF BLACKMAIL      _46_

    7 MR. MCGRATH REFUSES AN INVITATION      _57_

    8 A DEAD MAN      _66_

    9 ANTHONY DISPOSES OF A BODY      _74_

    10 CHIMNEYS      _83_

    11 SUPERINTENDENT BATTLE ARRIVES      _94_

    12 ANTHONY TELLS HIS STORY       _100_

    13 THE AMERICAN VISITOR      _110_

    14 MAINLY POLITICAL AND FINANCIAL      _116_

    15 THE FRENCH STRANGER      _125_

    16 TEA IN THE SCHOOLROOM      _138_

    17 A MIDNIGHT ADVENTURE      _150_

    18 SECOND MIDNIGHT ADVENTURE      _159_

    19 SECRET HISTORY      _170_

    20 BATTLE AND ANTHONY CONFER      _181_

    21 MR. ISAACSTEIN’S SUIT-CASE      _188_

    22 THE RED SIGNAL      _199_

    23 ENCOUNTER IN THE ROSE GARDEN      _212_

    24 THE HOUSE AT DOVER      _222_

    25 TUESDAY NIGHT AT CHIMNEYS      _230_

    26 THE 13TH OF OCTOBER      _238_

    27 THE 13TH OF OCTOBER (_contd._)      _244_

    28 KING VICTOR      _254_

    29 FURTHER EXPLANATIONS      _259_

    30 ANTHONY SIGNS ON FOR A NEW JOB      _264_

    31 SUNDRY DETAILS      _271_




1

Anthony Cade Signs on


“Gentleman Joe!”

“Why, if it isn’t old Jimmy McGrath.”

Castle’s Select Tour, represented by seven depressed-looking females
and three perspiring males, looked on with considerable interest.
Evidently their Mr. Cade had met an old friend. They all admired
Mr. Cade so much, his tall lean figure, his sun-tanned face, the
light-hearted manner with which he settled disputes and cajoled
them all into good temper. This friend of his now—surely rather a
peculiar-looking man. About the same height as Mr. Cade, but thickset
and not nearly so good-looking. The sort of man one read about in
books, who probably kept a saloon. Interesting, though. After all, that
was what one came abroad for—to see all these peculiar things one read
about in books. Up to now, they had been rather bored with Bulawayo.
The sun was unbearably hot, the hotel was uncomfortable, there seemed
to be nowhere particular to go until the moment should arrive to motor
to the Matoppos. Very fortunately, Mr. Cade had suggested picture
postcards. There was an excellent supply of picture postcards.

Anthony Cade and his friend had stepped a little apart.

“What the hell are you doing with this pack of females?” demanded
McGrath. “Starting a harem.”

“Not with this little lot,” grinned Anthony. “Have you taken a good
look at them?”

“I have that. Thought maybe you were losing your eyesight.”

“My eyesight’s as good as ever it was. No, this is a Castle’s Select
Tour. I’m Castle—the local Castle, I mean.”

“What the hell made you take on a job like that?”

“A regrettable necessity for cash. I can assure you it doesn’t suit my
temperament.”

Jimmy grinned.

“Never a hog for regular work, were you?”

Anthony ignored this aspersion.

“However, something will turn up soon, I expect,” he remarked
hopefully. “It usually does.”

Jimmy chuckled.

“If there’s any trouble brewing, Anthony Cade is sure to be in it
sooner or later, I know that,” he said. “You’ve an absolute instinct
for rows—_and_ the nine lives of a cat. When can we have a yarn
together?”

Anthony sighed.

“I’ve got to take these cackling hens to see Rhodes’s grave.”

“That’s the stuff,” said Jimmy approvingly. “They’ll come back bumped
black and blue with the ruts in the road, and clamouring for bed
to rest the bruises on. Then you and I will have a spot or two and
exchange the news.”

“Right. So long, Jimmy.”

Anthony rejoined his flock of sheep. Miss Taylor, the youngest and most
skittish of the party, instantly attacked him.

“Oh, Mr. Cade, was that an old friend of yours?”

“It was, Miss Taylor. One of the friends of my blameless youth.”

Miss Taylor giggled.

“I thought he was such an interesting-looking man.”

“I’ll tell him you said so.”

“Oh, Mr. Cade, how can you be so naughty! The very idea! What was that
name he called you?”

“Gentleman Joe?”

“Yes. Is your name Joe?”

“I thought you knew it was Anthony, Miss Taylor.”

“Oh, go on with you!” cried Miss Taylor coquettishly.

Anthony had by now well mastered his duties. In addition to making the
necessary arrangements of travel, they included soothing down irritable
old gentlemen when their dignity was ruffled, seeing that elderly
matrons had ample opportunities to buy picture postcards, and flirting
with everything under a catholic forty years of age. The last task
was rendered easier for him by the extreme readiness of the ladies in
question to read a tender meaning into his most innocent remarks.

Miss Taylor returned to the attack.

“Why does he call you Joe, then?”

“Oh, just because it isn’t my name.”

“And why Gentleman Joe?”

“The same kind of reason.”

“Oh, Mr. Cade,” protested Miss Taylor, much distressed, “I’m sure you
shouldn’t say that. Papa was only saying last night what gentlemanly
manners you had.”

“Very kind of your father, I’m sure, Miss Taylor.”

“And we are all agreed that you are quite the gentleman.”

“I’m overwhelmed.”

“No, really, I mean it.”

“Kind hearts are more than coronets,” said Anthony vaguely, without a
notion of what he meant by the remark, and wishing fervently it was
lunch time.

“That’s such a beautiful poem, I always think. Do you know much poetry,
Mr. Cade?”

“I might recite ‘The boy stood on the burning deck’ at a pinch. ‘The
boy stood on the burning deck, whence all but he had fled.’ That’s all
I know, but I can do that bit with action if you like. ‘The boy stood
on the burning deck’—whoosh—whoosh—whoosh—(the flames, you see)
‘Whence all but he had fled’—for that bit I run to and fro like a dog.”

Miss Taylor screamed with laughter.

“Oh, do look at Mr. Cade! Isn’t he funny?”

“Time for morning tea,” said Anthony briskly. “Come this way. There is
an excellent café in the next street.”

“I presume,” said Mrs. Caldicott, in her deep voice, “that the expense
is included in the Tour?”

“Morning tea, Mrs. Caldicott,” said Anthony, assuming his professional
manner, “is an extra.”

“Disgraceful.”

“Life is full of trials, isn’t it?” said Anthony cheerfully. Mrs.
Caldicott’s eyes gleamed, and she remarked with the air of one
springing a mine:

“I suspected as much, and in anticipation I poured off some tea into a
jug at breakfast this morning! I can heat that up on the spirit lamp.
Come, father.”

Mr. and Mrs. Caldicott sailed off triumphantly to the hotel, the lady’s
back complacent with successful forethought.

“Oh, Lord,” muttered Anthony, “what a lot of funny people it does take
to make a world.”

He marshalled the rest of the party in the direction of the café. Miss
Taylor kept by his side, and resumed her catechism.

“Is it a long time since you saw your friend?”

“Just over seven years.”

“Was it in Africa you knew him?”

“Yes, not this part though. The first time I ever saw Jimmy McGrath, he
was all trussed up ready for the cooking pot. Some of the tribes in the
interior are cannibals, you know. We got there just in time.”

“What happened?”

“Very nice little shindy. We potted some of the beggars, and the rest
took to their heels.”

“Oh, Mr. Cade, what an adventurous life you must have led!”

“Very peaceful, I assure you.”

But it was clear that the lady did not believe him.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was about ten o’clock that night when Anthony Cade walked into the
small room where Jimmy McGrath was busy manipulating various bottles.

“Make it strong, James,” he implored. “I can tell you, I need it.”

“I should think you did, my boy. I wouldn’t take on that job of yours
for anything.”

“Show me another, and I’ll jump out of it fast enough.”

McGrath poured out his own drink, tossed it off with a practised hand
and mixed a second one. Then he said slowly:

“Are you in earnest about that, old son?”

“About what?”

“Chucking this job of yours if you could get another?”

“Why? You don’t mean to say that you’ve got a job going begging? Why
don’t you grab it yourself?”

“I have grabbed it—but I don’t much fancy it, that’s why I’m trying to
pass it on to you.”

Anthony became suspicious.

“What’s wrong with it? They haven’t engaged you to teach in a Sunday
school, have they?”

“Do you think anyone would choose me to teach in a Sunday school?”

“Not if they knew you well, certainly.”

“It’s a perfectly good job—nothing wrong with it whatsoever.”

“Not in South America by any lucky chance? I’ve rather got my eye on
South America. There’s a very tidy little revolution coming off in one
of those little republics soon.”

McGrath grinned.

“You always were keen on revolutions—anything to be mixed up in a
really good row.”

“I feel my talents might be appreciated out there. I tell you, Jimmy,
I can be jolly useful in a revolution—to one side or the other. It’s
better than making an honest living any day.”

“I think I’ve heard that sentiment from you before, my son. No, the job
isn’t in South America—it’s in England.”

“England? Return of hero to his native land after many long years. They
can’t dun you for bills after seven years, can they, Jimmy?”

“I don’t think so. Well, are you on for hearing more about it?”

“I’m on all right. The thing that worries me is why you’re not taking
it on yourself.”

“I’ll tell you. I’m after gold, Anthony—far up in the interior.”

Anthony whistled and looked at him.

“You’ve always been after gold, Jimmy, ever since I knew you. It’s your
weak spot—your own particular little hobby. You’ve followed up more
wild-cat trails than anyone I know.”

“And in the end I’ll strike it. You’ll see.”

“Well, every one his own hobby. Mine’s rows, yours is gold.”

“I’ll tell you the whole story. I suppose you know all about
Herzoslovakia?”

Anthony looked up sharply.

“Herzoslovakia?” he said, with a curious ring in his voice.

“Yes. Know anything about it?”

There was quite an appreciable pause before Anthony answered. Then he
said slowly:

“Only what every one knows. It’s one of the Balkan States, isn’t it?
Principal rivers, unknown. Principal mountains, also unknown, but
fairly numerous. Capital, Ekarest. Population, chiefly brigands. Hobby,
assassinating Kings and having Revolutions. Last King, Nicholas IV.
Assassinated about seven years ago. Since then it’s been a Republic.
Altogether a very likely spot. You might have mentioned before that
Herzoslovakia came into it.”

“It doesn’t except indirectly.”

Anthony gazed at him more in sorrow than in anger.

“You ought to do something about this, James,” he said. “Take a
correspondence course, or something. If you’d told a story like this in
the good old Eastern days, you’d have been hung up by the heels and
bastinadoed or something equally unpleasant.”

Jimmy pursued his course quite unmoved by these strictures.

“Ever heard of Count Stylptitch?”

“Now you’re talking,” said Anthony. “Many people who have never heard
of Herzoslovakia would brighten at the mention of Count Stylptitch.
The Grand Old Man of the Balkans. The Greatest Statesman of Modern
Times. The biggest Villain unhung. The point of view all depends on
which newspaper you take in. But be sure of this, Count Stylptitch will
be remembered long after you and I are dust and ashes, James. Every
move and counter move in the Near East for the last twenty years has
had Count Stylptitch at the bottom of it. He’s been a dictator and a
patriot and a statesman—and nobody knows exactly what he has been,
except that he’s been a perfect King of intrigue. Well, what about him?”

“He was Prime Minister of Herzoslovakia—that’s why I mentioned it
first.”

“You’ve no sense of proportion, Jimmy. Herzoslovakia is of no
importance at all compared to Stylptitch. It just provided him with a
birthplace and a post in public affairs. But I thought he was dead?”

“So he is. He died in Paris about two months ago. What I’m telling you
about happened some years ago.”

“The question is,” said Anthony, “what _are_ you telling me about?”

Jimmy accepted the rebuke and hastened on.

“It was like this. I was in Paris—just four years ago, to be exact. I
was walking along one night in rather a lonely part, when I saw half a
dozen French toughs beating up a respectable-looking old gentleman. I
hate a one-sided show, so I promptly butted in and proceeded to beat
up the toughs. I guess they’d never been hit really hard before. They
melted like snow!”

“Good for you, James,” said Anthony softly. “I’d like to have seen that
scrap.”

“Oh, it was nothing much,” said Jimmy modestly. “But the old boy was
no end grateful. He’d had a couple, no doubt about that, but he was
sober enough to get my name and address out of me, and he came along
and thanked me next day. Did the thing in style too. It was then that I
found out it was Count Stylptitch I’d rescued. He’d got a house up by
the Bois.”

Anthony nodded.

“Yes, Stylptitch went to live in Paris after the assassination of King
Nicholas. They wanted him to come back and be President later, but he
wasn’t taking any. He remained sound to his Monarchical principals,
though he was reported to have his finger in all the backstairs pies
that went on in the Balkans. Very deep, the late Count Stylptitch.”

“Nicholas IV was the man who had a funny taste in wives, wasn’t he?”
said Jimmy suddenly.

“Yes,” said Anthony. “And it did for him too, poor beggar. She was some
little guttersnipe of a music hall artiste in Paris—not even suitable
for a morganatic alliance. But Nicholas had a frightful crush on her,
and she was all out for being a Queen. Sounds fantastic, but they
managed it somehow. Called her the Countess Popoffsky, or something,
and pretended she had Romanoff blood in her veins. Nicholas married her
in the Cathedral at Ekarest with a couple of unwilling Arch-bishops to
do the job, and she was crowned as Queen Varaga. Nicholas squared his
Ministers, and I suppose he thought that was all that mattered—but
he forgot to reckon with the populace. They’re very aristocratic and
reactionary in Herzoslovakia. They like their Kings and Queens to be
the genuine article. There were mutterings and discontent, and the
usual ruthless suppressions, and the final uprising which stormed the
Palace, murdered the King and Queen, and proclaimed a Republic. It’s
been a Republic ever since—but things still manage to be pretty lively
there, so I’ve heard. They’ve assassinated a President or two, just to
keep their hand in. But _revenons à nos moutons_. You had got to where
Count Stylptitch was hailing you as his preserver.”

“Yes. Well, that was the end of that business. I came back to
Africa and never thought of it again until about two weeks ago I
got a queer-looking parcel which had been following me all over the
place for the Lord knows how long. I’d seen in a paper that Count
Stylptitch had recently died in Paris. Well, this parcel contained his
Memoirs—or Reminiscences, or whatever you call the things. There was
a note enclosed to the effect that if I delivered the manuscript at a
certain firm of publishers in London on or before October 13 they were
instructed to hand me a thousand pounds.”

“A thousand pounds? Did you say a thousand pounds, Jimmy?”

“I did, my son. I hope to God it’s not a hoax. Put not your trust in
Princes or Politicians, as the saying goes. Well, there it is. Owing
to the way the manuscript had been following me around, I had no time
to lose. It was a pity, all the same. I’d just fixed up this trip to
the interior, and I’d set my heart on going. I shan’t get such a good
chance again.”

“You’re incurable, Jimmy. A thousand pounds in the hand is worth a lot
of mythical gold.”

“And supposing it’s all a hoax? Anyway, here I am, passage booked and
everything, on the way to Cape Town—and then you blow along!”

Anthony got up and lit a cigarette.

“I begin to perceive your drift, James. You go gold hunting as planned,
and I collect the thousand pounds for you. How much do I get out of it?”

“What do you say to a quarter?”

“Two hundred and fifty pounds free of income tax, as the saying goes?”

“That’s it.”

“Done, and just to make you gnash your teeth I’ll tell you that I would
have gone for a hundred! Let me tell you, James McGrath, _you_ won’t
die in your bed counting up your bank balance.”

“Anyway, it’s a deal?”

“It’s a deal all right. I’m on. And confusion to Castle’s Select Tours.”

They drank the toast solemnly.




2

A Lady in Distress


“So that’s that,” said Anthony, finishing off his glass and replacing
it on the table. “What boat were you going on?”

“_Granarth Castle._”

“Passage booked in your name, I suppose, so I’d better travel as James
McGrath. We’ve outgrown the passport business, haven’t we?”

“No odds either way. You and I are totally unlike, but we’d probably
have the same description on one of those blinking things. Height 6
feet, hair brown, eyes blue, nose, ordinary, chin ordinary——”

“Not so much of this ‘ordinary’ stunt. Let me tell you that Castle’s
selected me out of several applicants solely on account of my pleasing
appearance and nice manners.”

Jimmy grinned.

“I noticed your manners this morning.”

“The devil you did.”

Anthony rose and paced up and down the room. His brow was slightly
wrinkled, and it was some minutes before he spoke.

“Jimmy,” he said at last. “Stylptitch died in Paris. What’s the point
of sending a manuscript from Paris to London via Africa?”

Jimmy shook his head helplessly.

“I don’t know.”

“Why not do it up in a nice little parcel and send it by post?”

“Sounds a damn sight more sensible, I agree.”

“Of course,” continued Anthony, “I know that Kings and Queens and
Government officials are prevented by etiquette from doing anything
in a simple, straightforward fashion. Hence King’s Messengers and all
that. In medieval days you gave a fellow a signet ring as a sort of
Open Sesame. ‘The King’s Ring! Pass, my Lord!’ And usually it was the
other fellow who had stolen it. I always wonder why some bright lad
never hit on the expedient of copying the ring—making a dozen or so,
and selling them at a hundred ducats apiece. They seem to have had no
initiative in the Middle Ages.”

Jimmy yawned.

“My remarks on the Middle Ages don’t seem to amuse you. Let us get back
to Count Stylptitch. From France to England via Africa seems a bit
thick even for a diplomatic personage. If he merely wanted to ensure
that you should get a thousand pounds he could have left it you in his
will. Thank God neither you nor I are too proud to accept a legacy!
Stylptitch must have been balmy.”

“You’d think so, wouldn’t you?”

Anthony frowned and continued his pacing.

“Have you read the thing at all?” he asked suddenly.

“Read what?”

“The manuscript.”

“Good Lord, no. What do you think I want to read a thing of that kind
for?”

Anthony smiled.

“I just wondered, that’s all. You know a lot of trouble has been
caused by Memoirs. Indiscreet revelations, that sort of thing. People
who have been closed as an oyster all their lives seem positively
to relish causing trouble when they themselves shall be comfortably
dead. It gives them a kind of malicious glee. Jimmy, what sort of a
man was Count Stylptitch? You met him and talked to him, and you’re a
pretty good judge of raw human nature. Could you imagine him being a
vindictive old devil?”

Jimmy shook his head.

“It’s difficult to tell. You see, that first night he was distinctly
canned, and the next day he was just a high-toned old boy with the most
beautiful manners overwhelming me with compliments till I didn’t know
where to look.”

“And he didn’t say anything interesting when he was drunk?”

Jimmy cast his mind back, wrinkling his brows as he did so.

“He said he knew where the Koh-i-noor was,” he volunteered doubtfully.

“Oh, well,” said Anthony, “we all know that. They keep it in the
Tower, don’t they? Behind thick plate glass and iron bars, with a lot
of gentlemen in fancy dress standing round to see you don’t pinch
anything.”

“That’s right,” agreed Jimmy.

“Did Stylptitch say anything else of the same kind? That he knew which
city the Wallace Collection was in, for instance?”

Jimmy shook his head.

“H’m!” said Anthony.

He lit another cigarette, and once more began pacing up and down the
room.

“You never read the papers, I suppose, you heathen?” he threw out
presently.

“Not very often,” said McGrath simply. “They’re not about anything that
interests me as a rule.”

“Thank Heaven I’m more civilized. There have been several mentions of
Herzoslovakia lately. Hints at a Royalist restoration.”

“Nicholas IV didn’t leave a son,” said Jimmy. “But I don’t suppose for
a minute that the Obolovitch dynasty is extinct. There are probably
shoals of young ’uns knocking about, cousins and second cousins and
third cousins once removed.”

“So that there wouldn’t be any difficulty in finding a King?”

“Not in the least, I should say,” replied Jimmy. “You know, I
don’t wonder at their getting tired of Republican institutions. A
full-blooded, virile people like that must find it awfully tame to pot
at Presidents after being used to Kings. And talking of Kings, that
reminds me of something else old Stylptitch let out that night. He said
he knew the gang that was after him. They were King Victor’s people, he
said.”

“What?” Anthony wheeled round suddenly.

A slow grin widened on McGrath’s face.

“Just a mite excited, aren’t you, Gentleman Joe?” he drawled.

“Don’t be an ass, Jimmy. You’ve just said something rather important.”

He went over to the window and stood there looking out.

“Who is this King Victor, anyway?” demanded Jimmy. “Another Balkan
Monarch?”

“No,” said Anthony slowly. “He isn’t that kind of a King.”

“What is he, then?”

There was a pause, and then Anthony spoke.

“He’s a crook, Jimmy. The most notorious jewel thief in the world. A
fantastic, daring fellow, not to be daunted by anything. King Victor
was the nickname he was known by in Paris. Paris was the headquarters
of his gang. They caught him there and put him away for seven years on
a minor charge. They couldn’t prove the more important things against
him. He’ll be out soon—or he may be out already.”

“Do you think Count Stylptitch had anything to do with putting him
away? Was that why the gang went for him? Out of revenge?”

“I don’t know,” said Anthony. “It doesn’t seem likely on the face of
it. King Victor never stole the Crown jewels of Herzoslovakia as far
as I’ve heard. But the whole thing seems rather suggestive, doesn’t
it? The death of Stylptitch, the Memoirs, and the rumours in the
papers—all vague but interesting. And there’s a further rumour to the
effect that they’ve found oil in Herzoslovakia. I’ve a feeling in my
bones, James, that people are getting ready to be interested in that
unimportant little country.”

“What sort of people?”

“Financiers in City offices.”

“What are you driving at with all this?”

“Trying to make an easy job difficult, that’s all.”

“You can’t pretend there’s going to be any difficulty in handing over a
simple manuscript at a publisher’s office?”

“No,” said Anthony regretfully. “I don’t suppose there’ll be anything
difficult about that. But shall I tell you, James, where I propose to
go with my £250?”

“South America?”

“No, my lad, Herzoslovakia. I shall stand in with the Republic, I
think. Very probably I shall end up as President.”

“Why not announce yourself as the principal Obolovitch and be a King
whilst you’re about it?”

“No, Jimmy. Kings are for life. Presidents only take on the job for
four years or so. It would quite amuse me to govern a kingdom like
Herzoslovakia for four years.”

“The average for Kings is even less, I should say,” interpolated Jimmy.

“It will probably be a serious temptation to me to embezzle your share
of the thousand pounds. You won’t want it, you know, when you get back
weighed down with nuggets. I’ll invest it for you in Herzoslovakian oil
shares. You know, James, the more I think of it, the more pleased I am
with this idea of yours. I should never have thought of Herzoslovakia
if you hadn’t mentioned it. I shall spend one day in London, collecting
the booty, and then away by the Balkan express!”

“You won’t get off quite as fast as that. I didn’t mention it before,
but I’ve got another little commission for you.”

Anthony sank into a chair and eyed him severely.

“I knew all along that you were keeping something dark. This is where
the catch comes in.”

“Not a bit. It’s just something that’s got to be done to help a lady.”

“Once and for all, James, I refuse to be mixed up in your beastly love
affairs.”

“It’s not a love affair. I’ve never seen the woman. I’ll tell you the
whole story.”

“If I’ve got to listen to more of your long, rambling stories, I shall
have to have another drink.”

His host complied hospitably with this demand, then began the tale.

“It was when I was up in Uganda. There was a Dago there whose life I
had saved——”

“If I were you, Jimmy, I should write a short book entitled ‘Lives I
have Saved.’ This is the second I’ve heard of this evening.”

“Oh, well, I didn’t really do anything this time. Just pulled the Dago
out of the river. Like all Dagos, he couldn’t swim.”

“Wait a minute, has this story anything to do with the other business?”

“Nothing whatever, though, oddly enough, now I remember it, the man was
a Herzoslovakian. We always called him Dutch Pedro though.”

Anthony nodded indifferently.

“Any name’s good enough for a Dago,” he remarked. “Get on with the good
work, James.”

“Well, the fellow was sort of grateful about it. Hung around like a
dog. About six months later he died of fever. I was with him. Last
thing, just as he was pegging out, he beckoned me and whispered some
excited jargon about a secret—a gold mine, I thought he said. Shoved
an oilskin packet into my hand which he’d always worn next his skin.
Well, I didn’t think much of it at the time. It wasn’t until a week
afterwards that I opened the packet. Then I was curious, I must
confess. I shouldn’t have thought that Dutch Pedro would have had the
sense to know a gold mine when he saw it—but there’s no accounting for
luck——”

“And at the mere thought of gold, your heart beat pitter-pat as
always,” interrupted Anthony.

“I was never so disgusted in my life. Gold mine, indeed! I daresay it
may have been a gold mine to him, the dirty dog. Do you know what it
was? A woman’s letters—yes, a woman’s letters, and an Englishwoman at
that. The skunk had been blackmailing her—and he had the impudence to
pass on his dirty bag of tricks to me.”

“I like to see your righteous heat, James, but let me point out to
you that Dagos will be Dagos. He meant well. You had saved his life,
he bequeathed to you a profitable source of raising money—your
high-minded British ideals did not enter his horizon.”

“Well, what the hell was I to do with the things? Burn ’em, that’s what
I thought at first. And then it occurred to me that there would be that
poor dame, not knowing they’d be destroyed, and always living in a
quake and a dread lest that Dago should turn up again one day.”

“You’ve more imagination than I gave you credit for, Jimmy,” observed
Anthony, lighting a cigarette. “I admit that the case presented more
difficulties than were at first apparent. What about just sending them
to her by post?”

“Like all women, she’d put no date and no address on most of the
letters. There was a kind of address on one—just one word. Chimneys.”

Anthony paused in the act of blowing out his match, and he dropped it
with a quick jerk of the wrist as it burned his finger.

“Chimneys?” he said. “That’s rather extraordinary.”

“Why, do you know it?”

“It’s one of the stately homes of England, my dear James. A place
where Kings and Queens go for weekends, and diplomatists forgather and
diplome.”

“That’s one of the reasons why I’m so glad that you’re going to England
instead of me. You know all these things,” said Jimmy simply. “A josser
like myself from the backwoods of Canada would be making all sorts of
bloomers. But some one like you who’s been to Eton and Harrow——”

“Only one of them,” said Anthony modestly.

“Will be able to carry it through. Why didn’t I send them to her, you
say? Well, it seemed to me dangerous. From what I could make out, she
seemed to have a jealous husband. Suppose he opened the letter by
mistake. Where would the poor dame be then? Or she might be dead—the
letters looked as though they’d been written some time. As I figured it
out, the only thing was for some one to take them to England and put
them into her own hands.”

Anthony threw away his cigarette, and coming across to his friend
clapped him affectionately on the back.

“You’re a real knight-errant, Jimmy,” he said. “And the backwoods of
Canada should be proud of you. I shan’t do the job half as prettily as
you would.”

“You’ll take it on then?”

“Of course.”

McGrath rose, and going across to a drawer took out a bundle of letters
and threw them on the table.

“Here you are. You’d better have a look at them.”

“Is it necessary? On the whole, I’d rather not.”

“Well, from what you say about this Chimneys place, she may have been
staying there only. We’d better look through the letters and see if
there’s any clue as to where she really hangs out.”

“I suppose you’re right.”

They went through the letters carefully, but without finding what they
had hoped to find. Anthony gathered them up again thoughtfully.

“Poor little devil,” he remarked. “She was scared stiff.”

Jimmy nodded.

“Do you think you’ll be able to find her all right?” he asked
anxiously.

“I won’t leave England till I have. You’re very concerned about this
unknown lady, James?”

Jimmy ran his finger thoughtfully over the signature.

“It’s a pretty name,” he said apologetically. “_Virginia Revel._”




3

Anxiety in High Places


“Quite so, my dear fellow, quite so,” said Lord Caterham.

He had used the same words three times already, each time in the hope
that they would end the interview and permit him to escape. He disliked
very much being forced to stand on the steps of the exclusive London
club to which he belonged and listen to the interminable eloquence of
the Hon. George Lomax.

Clement Edward Alistair Brent, ninth Marquis of Caterham, was a small
gentleman, shabbily dressed, and entirely unlike the popular conception
of a Marquis. He had faded blue eyes, a thin melancholy nose, and a
vague but courteous manner.

The principal misfortune of Lord Caterham’s life was to have succeeded
his brother, the eighth Marquis, four years ago. For the previous Lord
Caterham had been a man of mark, a household word all over England. At
one time Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, he had always bulked
largely in the counsels of the Empire, and his country seat, Chimneys,
was famous for its hospitality. Ably seconded by his wife, a daughter
of the Duke of Perth, history had been made and unmade at informal
week-end parties at Chimneys, and there was hardly anyone of note in
England—or indeed in Europe—who had not, at one time or another,
stayed there.

That was all very well. The ninth Marquis of Caterham had the utmost
respect and esteem for the memory of his brother. Henry had done that
kind of thing magnificently. What Lord Caterham objected to was the
assumption that he was bound to follow in his brother’s footsteps,
and that Chimneys was a National possession rather than a private
country house. There was nothing that bored Lord Caterham more than
politics—unless it was politicians. Hence his impatience under the
continued eloquence of George Lomax. A robust man, George Lomax,
inclined to _embonpoint_, with a red face and protuberant eyes, and an
immense sense of his own importance.

“You see the point, Caterham? We can’t—we simply can’t afford a
scandal of any kind just now. The position is one of the utmost
delicacy.”

“It always is,” said Lord Caterham, with a flavour of irony.

“My dear fellow, I’m in a position to _know_!”

“Oh, quite so, quite so,” said Lord Caterham, falling back upon his
previous line of defence.

“One slip over this Herzoslovakian business and we’re done. It is most
important that the Oil concessions should be granted to a British
company. You must see that?”

“Of course, of course.”

“Prince Michael Obolovitch arrives the end of the week, and the whole
thing can be carried through at Chimneys under the guise of a shooting
party.”

“I was thinking of going abroad this week,” said Lord Caterham.

“Nonsense, my dear Caterham, no one goes abroad in early October.”

“My doctor seems to think I’m in rather a bad way,” said Lord Caterham,
eyeing a taxi that was crawling past with longing eyes.

He was quite unable to make a dash for liberty, however, since Lomax
had the unpleasant habit of retaining a hold upon a person with whom
he was engaged in serious conversation—doubtless the result of long
experience. In this case, he had a firm grip of the lapel of Lord
Caterham’s coat.

“My dear man, I put it to you imperially. In a moment of national
crisis, such as is fast approaching——”

Lord Caterham wriggled uneasily. He felt suddenly that he would rather
give any number of house parties than listen to George Lomax quoting
from one of his own speeches. He knew by experience that Lomax was
quite capable of going on for twenty minutes without a stop.

“All right,” he said hastily, “I’ll do it. You’ll arrange the whole
thing, I suppose.”

“My dear fellow, there’s nothing to arrange. Chimneys, quite apart
from its historic associations, is ideally situated. I shall be at the
Abbey, less than seven miles away. It wouldn’t do, of course, for me to
be actually a member of the house party.”

“Of course not,” agreed Lord Caterham, who had no idea why it would not
do, and was not interested to learn.

“Perhaps you wouldn’t mind having Bill Eversleigh, though. He’d be
useful to run messages.”

“Delighted,” said Lord Caterham, with a shade more animation. “Bill’s
quite a decent shot, and Bundle likes him.”

“The shooting, of course, is not really important. It’s only the
pretext, as it were.”

Lord Caterham looked depressed again.

“That will be all, then. The Prince, his suite, Bill Eversleigh, Herman
Isaacstein——”

“Who?”

“Herman Isaacstein. The representative of the syndicate I spoke to you
about.”

“The all British syndicate?”

“Yes. Why?”

“Nothing—nothing—I only wondered, that’s all. Curious names these
people have.”

“Then, of course, there ought to be one or two outsiders—just to
give the thing a _bona fide_ appearance. Lady Eileen could see to
that—young people, uncritical, and with no idea of politics.”

“Bundle would attend to that all right, I’m sure.”

“I wonder now.” Lomax seemed struck by an idea.

“You remember the matter I was speaking about just now?”

“You’ve been speaking about so many things.”

“No, no, I mean this unfortunate _contretemps_”—— he lowered his
voice to a mysterious whisper—“the memoirs—Count Stylptitch’s
memoirs.”

“I think you’re wrong about that,” said Lord Caterham, suppressing
a yawn. “People _like_ scandal. Damn it all, I read Reminiscences
myself—and enjoy ’em too.”

“The point is not whether people will read them or not—they’ll read
them fast enough—but their publication at this juncture might ruin
everything—everything. The people of Herzoslovakia wish to restore the
Monarchy, and are prepared to offer the Crown to Prince Michael who has
the support and encouragement of His Majesty’s Government——”

“And who is prepared to grant concessions to Mr. Ikey Hermanstein & Co.
in return for the loan of a million or so to set him on the throne——”

“Caterham, Caterham,” implored Lomax in an agonized whisper.
“Discretion, I beg of you. Above all things, discretion.”

“And the point is,” continued Lord Caterham, with some relish, though
he lowered his voice in obedience to the other’s appeal, “that some
of Stylptitch’s Reminiscences may upset the apple cart. Tyranny and
misbehaviour of the Obolovitch family generally, eh? Questions asked in
the House. Why replace the present broad-minded and democratic form of
Government by an obsolete tyranny? Policy dictated by the blood-sucking
Capitalists. Down with the Government. That kind of thing—eh?”

Lomax nodded.

“And there might be worse still,” he breathed. “Suppose—only
suppose that some reference should be made to—to that unfortunate
disappearance—you know what I mean.”

Lord Caterham stared at him.

“No, I don’t. What disappearance?”

“You must have heard of it? Why, it happened while they were at
Chimneys. Henry was terribly upset about it. It almost ruined his
career.”

“You interest me enormously,” said Lord Caterham. “Who or what
disappeared?”

Lomax leant forward and put his mouth to Lord Caterham’s ear. The
latter withdrew it hastily.

“For God’s sake, don’t hiss at me.”

“You heard what I said?”

“Yes, I did,” said Lord Caterham reluctantly. “I remember now hearing
something about it at the time. Very curious affair. I wonder who did
it. It was never recovered?”

“Never. Of course we had to go about the matter with the utmost
discretion. No hint of the loss could be allowed to leak out. But
Stylptitch was there at the time. He knew something. Not all, but
something. We were at loggerheads with him once or twice over the
Turkish question. Suppose that in sheer malice he has set the whole
thing down for the world to read. Think of the scandal—of the
far-reaching results. Every one would say—why was it hushed up?”

“Of course they would,” said Lord Caterham, with evident enjoyment.

Lomax, whose voice had risen to a high pitch, took a grip on himself.

“I must keep calm,” he murmured. “I must keep calm. But I ask you
this, my dear fellow. If he didn’t mean mischief, why did he send the
manuscript to London in this roundabout way?”

“It’s odd, certainly. You are sure of your facts?”

“Absolutely. We—er—had our agents in Paris. The Memoirs were conveyed
away secretly some weeks before his death.”

“Yes, it looks as though there’s something in it,” said Lord Caterham,
with the same relish he had displayed before.

“We have found out that they were sent to a man called Jimmy, or James,
McGrath, a Canadian at present in Africa.”

“Quite an Imperial affair, isn’t it?” said Lord Caterham cheerily.

“James McGrath is due to arrive by the _Granarth Castle_
to-morrow—Thursday.”

“What are you going to do about it?”

“We shall, of course, approach him at once, point out the possibly
serious consequences, and beg him to defer publication of the
Memoirs for at least a month, and in any case to permit them to be
judiciously—er—edited.”

“Supposing that he says ‘No, sir,’ or ‘I’ll goddarned well see you in
hell first,’ or something bright and breezy like that?” suggested Lord
Caterham.

“That’s just what I’m afraid of,” said Lomax simply. “That’s why it
suddenly occurred to me that it might be a good thing to ask him down
to Chimneys as well. He’d be flattered, naturally, at being asked to
meet Prince Michael, and it might be easier to handle him.”

“I’m not going to do it,” said Lord Caterham hastily. “I don’t get on
with Canadians, never did—especially those that have lived much in
Africa!”

“You’d probably find him a splendid fellow—a rough diamond, you know.”

“No, Lomax. I put my foot down there absolutely. Somebody else has got
to tackle him.”

“It has occurred to me,” said Lomax, “that a woman might be very useful
here. Told enough and not too much, you understand. A woman could
handle the whole thing delicately and with tact—put the position
before him, as it were, without getting his back up. Not that I approve
of women in politics—St. Stephen’s is ruined, absolutely ruined,
nowadays. But woman in her own sphere can do wonders. Look at Henry’s
wife and what she did for him. Marcia was magnificent, unique, a
perfect political hostess.”

“You don’t want me to ask Marcia down for this party, do you?” asked
Lord Caterham faintly, turning a little pale at the mention of his
redoubtable sister-in-law.

“No, no, you misunderstand me. I was speaking of the influence of women
in general. No, I suggest a young woman, a woman of charm, beauty,
intelligence?”

“Not Bundle? Bundle would be no use at all. She’s a red-hot socialist
if she’s anything at all, and she’d simply scream with laughter at the
suggestion.”

“I was not thinking of Lady Eileen. Your daughter, Caterham, is
charming, simply charming, but quite a child. We need some one with
_savoir faire_, poise, knowledge of the world—— Ah, of course, the
very person. My cousin Virginia.”

“Mrs. Revel?” Lord Caterham brightened up. He began to feel that he
might possibly enjoy the party after all. “A very good suggestion of
yours, Lomax. The most charming woman in London.”

“She is well up in Herzoslovakian affairs too. Her husband was at the
Embassy there, you remember. And, as you say, a woman of great personal
charm.”

“A delightful creature,” murmured Lord Caterham.

“That is settled, then.”

Mr. Lomax relaxed his hold on Lord Caterham’s lapel, and the latter was
quick to avail himself of the chance.

“Bye-bye, Lomax, you’ll make all the arrangements, won’t you.”

He dived into a taxi. As far as it is possible for one upright
Christian gentleman to dislike another upright Christian gentleman,
Lord Caterham disliked the Hon. George Lomax. He disliked his puffy red
face, his heavy breathing, and his prominent blue eyes. He thought of
the coming week and sighed. A nuisance, an abominable nuisance. Then he
thought of Virginia Revel and cheered up a little.

“A delightful creature,” he murmured to himself. “A most delightful
creature.”




4

Introducing a Very Charming Lady


George Lomax returned straightway to Whitehall. As he entered the
sumptuous apartment in which he transacted affairs of State, there was
a scuffling sound.

Mr. Bill Eversleigh was assiduously filing letters, but a large
arm-chair near the window was still warm from contact with a human form.

A very likeable young man, Bill Eversleigh. Age at a guess,
twenty-five, big and rather ungainly in his movements, a pleasurably
ugly face, a splendid set of white teeth and a pair of honest brown
eyes.

“Richardson sent up that report yet?”

“No, sir. Shall I get on to him about it?”

“It doesn’t matter. Any telephone messages?”

“Miss Oscar is dealing with most of them. Mr. Isaacstein wants to know
if you can dine with him at the Savoy to-morrow.”

“Tell Miss Oscar to look in my engagement-book. If I’m not engaged, she
can ring up and accept.”

“Yes, sir.”

“By the way, Eversleigh, you might ring up a number for me now. Look it
up in the book. Mrs. Revel, 487, Pont Street.”

“Yes, sir.”

Bill seized the telephone-book, ran an unseeing eye down a column of
M’s, shut the book with a bang and moved to the instrument on the desk.
With his hand upon it, he paused, as though in sudden recollection.

“Oh, I say, sir, I’ve just remembered. Her line’s out of order. Mrs.
Revel’s, I mean. I was trying to ring her up just now.”

George Lomax frowned.

“Annoying,” he said, “distinctly annoying.” He tapped the table
undecidedly.

“If it’s anything important, sir, perhaps I might go round there now in
a taxi. She’s sure to be in at this time in the morning.”

George Lomax hesitated, pondering the matter. Bill waited expectantly,
poised for instant flight, should the reply be favourable.

“Perhaps that would be the best plan,” said Lomax at last. “Very well,
then, take a taxi there, and ask Mrs. Revel if she will be at home this
afternoon at four o’clock as I am very anxious to see her about an
important matter.”

“Right, sir.”

Bill seized his hat and departed.

Ten minutes later, a taxi deposited him at 487, Pont Street. He rang
the bell and executed a loud rat-tat on the knocker. The door was
opened by a grave functionary to whom Bill nodded with the ease of long
acquaintance.

“Morning, Chilvers, Mrs. Revel in?”

“I believe, sir, that she is just going out.”

“Is that you, Bill?” called a voice over the banisters. “I thought I
recognized that muscular knock. Come up and talk to me.”

Bill looked up at the face that was laughing down on him, and which
was always inclined to reduce him—and not him alone—to a state of
babbling incoherency. He took the stairs two at a time and clasped
Virginia Revel’s out-stretched hands tightly in his.

“Hullo, Virginia!”

“Hullo, Bill!”

Charm is a very peculiar thing; hundreds of young women, some of them
more beautiful than Virginia Revel, might have said “Hullo, Bill,”
with exactly the same intonation, and yet have produced no effect
whatever. But those two simple words, uttered by Virginia, had the
most intoxicating effect upon Bill.

Virginia Revel was just twenty-seven. She was tall and of an exquisite
slimness—indeed, a poem might have been written to her slimness, it
was so exquisitely proportioned. Her hair was of real bronze, with the
greenish tint in its gold; she had a determined little chin, a lovely
nose, slanting blue eyes that showed a gleam of deepest cornflower
between the half-closed lids, and a delicious and quite indescribable
mouth that tilted ever so slightly at one corner in what is known as
“the signature of Venus.” It was a wonderfully expressive face, and
there was a sort of radiant vitality about her that always challenged
attention. It would have been quite impossible ever to ignore Virginia
Revel.

She drew Bill into the small drawing-room which was all pale and mauve
and green and yellow, like crocuses surprised in a meadow.

“Bill, darling,” said Virginia, “isn’t the Foreign Office missing you?
I thought they couldn’t get on without you.”

“I’ve brought a message for you from Codders.”

Thus irreverently did Bill allude to his chief.

“And by the way, Virginia, in case he asks, remember that your
telephone was out of order this morning.”

“But it hasn’t been.”

“I know that. But I said it was.”

“Why? Enlighten me as to this Foreign Office touch.”

Bill threw her a reproachful glance.

“So that I could get here and see you, of course.”

“Oh, darling Bill, how dense of me! And how perfectly sweet of you!”

“Chilvers said you were going out.”

“So I was—to Sloane Street. There’s a place there where they’ve got a
perfectly wonderful new hip band.”

“A hip band?”

“Yes, Bill, H.I.P. hip, B.A.N.D. band. A band to confine the hips. You
wear it next the skin.”

“I blush for you, Virginia. You shouldn’t describe your underwear to a
young man to whom you are not related. It isn’t delicate.”

“But, Bill dear, there’s nothing indelicate about hips. We’ve all got
hips—although we poor women are trying awfully hard to pretend we
haven’t. This hip band is made of red rubber and comes just to above
the knee, and it’s simply impossible to walk in it.”

“How awful!” said Bill. “Why do you do it?”

“Oh, because it gives one such a noble feeling to suffer for one’s
silhouette. But don’t let’s talk about my hip band. Give me George’s
message.”

“He wants to know whether you’ll be in at four o’clock this afternoon.”

“I shan’t. I shall be at Ranelagh. Why this sort of formal call? Is he
going to propose to me, do you think?”

“I shouldn’t wonder.”

“Because, if so, you can tell him that I much prefer men who propose on
impulse.”

“Like me?”

“It’s not an impulse with you, Bill. It’s habit.”

“Virginia, won’t you ever——”

“No, no, no, Bill. I won’t have it in the morning before lunch. Do try
and think of me as a nice motherly person approaching middle age who
has your interests thoroughly at heart.”

“Virginia, I do love you so.”

“I know, Bill, I know. And I simply love being loved. Isn’t it wicked
and dreadful of me? I should like every nice man in the world to be in
love with me.”

“Most of them are, I expect,” said Bill gloomily.

“But I hope George isn’t in love with me. I don’t think he can be. He’s
so wedded to his career. What else did he say?”

“Just that it was very important.”

“Bill, I’m getting intrigued. The things that George thinks important
are so awfully limited. I think I must chuck Ranelagh. After all, I
can go to Ranelagh any day. Tell George that I shall be awaiting him
meekly at four o’clock.”

Bill looked at his wrist watch.

“It seems hardly worth while to go back before lunch. Come out and chew
something, Virginia.”

“I’m going out to lunch somewhere or other.”

“That doesn’t matter. Make a day of it, and chuck everything all round.”

“It would be rather nice,” said Virginia, smiling at him.

“Virginia, you’re a darling. Tell me, you do like me rather, don’t you?
Better than other people.”

“Bill, I adore you. If I had to marry some one—simply had to—I mean
if it was in a book and a wicked mandarin said to me ‘Marry some one or
die by slow torture,’ I should choose you at once—I should indeed. I
should say, ‘Give me little Bill.’”

“Well, then——”

“Yes, but I haven’t got to marry any one. I love being a wicked widow.”

“You could do all the same things still. Go about, and all that. You’d
hardly notice me about the house.”

“Bill, you don’t understand. I’m the kind of person who marries
enthusiastically if they marry at all.”

Bill gave a hollow groan.

“I shall shoot myself one of these days, I expect,” he murmured
gloomily.

“No, you won’t, Bill darling. You’ll take a pretty girl out to
supper—like you did the night before last.”

Mr. Eversleigh was momentarily confused.

“If you mean Dorothy Kirkpatrick, the girl who’s in _Hooks and Eyes_,
I—well, dash it all, she’s a thoroughly nice girl, straight as they
make ’em. There was no harm in it.”

“Bill, darling, of course there wasn’t. I love you to enjoy yourself.
But don’t pretend to be dying of a broken heart, that’s all.”

Mr. Eversleigh recovered his dignity.

“You don’t understand at all, Virginia,” he said severely. “Men——”

“Are polygamous! I know they are. Sometimes I have a shrewd suspicion
that I am polyandrous. If you really love me, Bill, take me out to
lunch quickly.”




5

First Night in London


There is often a flaw in the best-laid plans. George Lomax had made one
mistake—there was a weak spot in his preparations. The weak spot was
Bill.

Bill Eversleigh was an extremely nice lad. He was a good cricketer and
a scratch golfer, he had pleasant manners, and an amiable disposition,
but his position in the Foreign Office had been gained, not by brains,
but by good connections. For the work he had to do he was quite
suitable. He was more or less George’s dog. He did no responsible
or brainy work. His part was to be constantly at George’s elbow, to
interview unimportant people whom George didn’t want to see, to run
errands, and generally to make himself useful. All this Bill carried
out faithfully enough. When George was absent, Bill stretched himself
out in the biggest chair and read the sporting news, and in so doing he
was merely carrying out a time-honoured tradition.

Being accustomed to send Bill on errands, George had dispatched him to
the Union Castle offices to find out when the _Granarth Castle_ was due
in. Now, in common with most well-educated young Englishmen, Bill had
a pleasant, but quite inaudible voice. Any elocution master would have
found fault with his pronunciation of the word Granarth. It might have
been anything. The Clerk took it to be Carnfrae. The _Carnfrae Castle_
was due in on the following Thursday. He said so. Bill thanked him and
went out. George Lomax accepted the information and laid his plans
accordingly. He knew nothing about Union Castle liners, and took it
for granted that James McGrath would duly arrive on Thursday.

Therefore, at the moment he was buttonholing Lord Caterham on the steps
of the club on Wednesday morning, he would have been greatly surprised
to learn that the _Granarth Castle_ had docked at Southampton the
preceding afternoon.

At two o’clock that afternoon Anthony Cade, travelling under the name
of Jimmy McGrath, stepped out of the boat train at Waterloo, hailed a
taxi, and after a moment’s hesitation ordered the driver to proceed to
the Blitz Hotel.

“One might as well be comfortable,” said Anthony to himself, as he
looked with some interest out of the taxi windows.

It was exactly fourteen years since he had been in London.

He arrived at the hotel, booked a room, and then went for a short
stroll along the Embankment. It was rather pleasant to be back in
London again. Everything was changed of course. There had been a
little restaurant there—just past Blackfriars Bridge—where he had
dined fairly often, in company with other earnest lads. He had been a
Socialist then, and worn a flowing red tie. Young—very young.

He retraced his steps back to the Blitz. Just as he was crossing the
road, a man jostled against him, nearly making him lose his balance.
They both recovered themselves, and the man muttered an apology, his
eyes scanning Anthony’s face narrowly. He was a short, thickset man of
the working classes, with something foreign in his appearance.

Anthony went on into the hotel, wondering, as he did so, what had
inspired that searching glance. Nothing in it probably. The deep tan of
his face was somewhat unusual looking amongst these pallid Londoners
and it had attracted the fellow’s attention. He went up to his room
and, led by a sudden impulse, crossed to the looking-glass and stood
studying his face in it. Of the few friends of the old days—just a
chosen few—was it likely that any of them would recognize him now if
they were to meet him face to face? He shook his head slowly.

When he had left London he had been just eighteen—a fair, slightly
chubby boy, with a misleading seraphic expression. Small chance that
the boy would be recognized in the lean, brown-faced man with the
quizzical expression.

The telephone beside the bed rang, and Anthony crossed to the receiver.

“Hullo!”

The voice of the desk clerk answered him.

“Mr. James McGrath?”

“Speaking.”

“A gentleman has called to see you.”

Anthony was rather astonished.

“To see _me_?”

“Yes, sir, a foreign gentleman.”

“What’s his name?”

There was a slight pause, and then the clerk said:

“I will send up a page boy with his card.”

Anthony replaced the receiver and waited. In a few minutes there was
a knock on the door and a small page appeared bearing a card upon a
salver.

Anthony took it. The following was the name engraved upon it:

  BARON LOLOPRETJZYL.

He now fully appreciated the desk clerk’s pause.

For a moment or two he stood studying the card, and then made up his
mind.

“Show the gentleman up.”

“Very good, sir.”

In a few minutes the Baron _Lolopretjzyl_ was ushered into the room, a
big man with an immense fan-like black beard and a high, bald forehead.

He brought his heels together with a click, and bowed.

“Mr. McGrath,” he said.

Anthony imitated his movements as nearly as possible.

“Baron,” he said. Then, drawing forward a chair. “Pray sit down. I have
not, I think, had the pleasure of meeting you before?”

“That is so,” agreed the Baron, seating himself. “It is my misfortune,”
he added politely.

“And mine also,” responded Anthony, on the same note.

“Let us now to business come,” said the Baron. “I represent in London
the Loyalist party of Herzoslovakia.”

“And represent it admirably, I am sure,” murmured Anthony.

The Baron bowed in acknowledgment of the compliment.

“You are too kind,” he said stiffly. “Mr. McGrath, I will not from
you conceal anything. The moment has come for the Restoration of the
Monarchy, in abeyance since the martyrdom of His Most Gracious Majesty
King Nicolas IV of blessed memory.”

“Amen,” murmured Anthony. “I mean Hear, Hear.”

“On the throne will be placed His Highness Prince Michael who the
support of the British Government has.”

“Splendid,” said Anthony. “It’s very kind of you to tell me all this.”

“Everything arranged is—when you come here to trouble make.”

The Baron fixed him with a stern eye.

“My dear Baron,” protested Anthony.

“Yes, yes, I know what I am talking about. You have with you the
Memoirs of the late Count Stylptitch.”

He fixed Anthony with an accusing eye.

“And if I have? What have the Memoirs of Count Stylptitch to do with
Prince Michael?”

“They will cause scandals.”

“Most memoirs do that,” said Anthony soothingly.

“Of many secrets he the knowledge had. Should he reveal but the
quarter of them, Europe into war plunged may be.”

“Come, come,” said Anthony. “It can’t be as bad as all that.”

“An unfavourable opinion of the Obolovitch will abroad be spread. So
democratic is the English spirit.”

“I can quite believe,” said Anthony, “that the Obolovitch may have been
a trifle high-handed now and again. It runs in the blood. But people in
England expect that sort of thing from the Balkans. I don’t know why
they should, but they do.”

“You do not understand,” said the Baron. “You do not understand at all.
And my lips sealed are.” He sighed.

“What exactly are you afraid of?” asked Anthony.

“Until I have read the Memoirs I do not know,” explained the Baron
simply. “But there is sure to be something. These great diplomats are
always indiscreet. The apple cart upset will be, as the saying goes.”

“Look here,” said Anthony kindly. “I’m sure you’re taking altogether
too pessimistic a view of the thing. I know all about publishers—they
sit on manuscripts and hatch ’em like eggs. It will be at least a year
before the thing is published.”

“Either a very deceitful or a very simple young man you are. All is
arranged for the Memoirs in a Sunday newspaper to come out immediately.”

“Oh!” Anthony was somewhat taken aback. “But you can always deny
everything,” he said hopefully.

The Baron shook his head sadly.

“No, no, through the hat you talk. Let us to business come. One
thousand pounds you are to have, is it not so? You see, I have the good
information got.”

“I certainly congratulate the Intelligence Department of the Loyalists.”

“Then I to you offer fifteen hundred.”

Anthony stared at him in amazement, then shook his head ruefully.

“I’m afraid it can’t be done,” he said, with regret.

“Good. I to you offer two thousand.”

“You tempt me, Baron, you tempt me. But I still say it can’t be done.”

“Your own price name, then.”

“I’m afraid you don’t understand the position. I’m perfectly willing to
believe that you are on the side of the angels, and that these Memoirs
may damage your cause. Nevertheless, I’ve undertaken the job, and I’ve
got to carry it through. See? I can’t allow myself to be bought off by
the other side. That kind of thing isn’t done.”

The Baron listened very attentively. At the end of Anthony’s speech he
nodded his head several times.

“I see. Your honour as an English gentleman it is?”

“Well, we don’t put it that way ourselves,” said Anthony. “But I dare
say, allowing for a difference in vocabulary, that we both mean much
the same thing.”

The Baron rose to his feet.

“For the English honour I much respect have,” he announced. “We must
another way try. I wish you good morning.”

He drew his heels together, clicked, bowed and marched out of the room,
holding himself stiffly erect.

“Now I wonder what he meant by that,” mused Anthony. “Was it a threat?
Not that I’m in the least afraid of old Lollipop. Rather a good name
for him, that, by the way. I shall call him Baron Lollipop.”

He took a turn or two up and down the room, undecided on his next
course of action. The date stipulated upon for delivering the
manuscript was a little over a week ahead. To-day was the 5th of
October. Anthony had no intention of handing it over before the last
moment. Truth to tell, he was by now feverishly anxious to read
these Memoirs. He had meant to do so on the boat coming over, but
had been laid low with a touch of fever, and not at all in the mood
for deciphering crabbed and illegible handwriting, for none of the
manuscript was typed. He was now more than ever determined to see what
all the fuss was about.

There was the other job too.

On an impulse, he picked up the telephone book and looked up the name
of Revel. There were six Revels in the book: Edward Henry Revel,
surgeon, of Harley Street; James Revel & Co., saddlers; Lennox Revel
of Abbotbury Mansions, Hampstead; Miss Mary Revel with an address in
Ealing; Hon. Mrs. Timothy Revel of 487, Pont Street; and Mrs. Willis
Revel of 42, Cadogan Square. Eliminating the saddlers and Miss Mary
Revel, that gave him four names to investigate—and there was no reason
to suppose that the lady lived in London at all! He shut up the book
with a short shake of the head.

“For the moment I’ll leave it to chance,” he said. “Something usually
turns up.”

The luck of the Anthony Cades of this world is perhaps in some measure
due to their own belief in it. Anthony found what he was after not half
an hour later, when he was turning over the pages of an illustrated
paper. It was a representation of some tableau organized by the Duchess
of Perth. Below the central figure, a woman in Eastern dress, was the
inscription:

“The Hon. Mrs. Timothy Revel as Cleopatra. Before her marriage, Mrs.
Revel was the Hon. Virginia Cawthron, a daughter of Lord Edgbaston.”

Anthony looked at the picture some time, slowly pursing up his lips, as
though to whistle. Then he tore out the whole page, folded it up and
put it in his pocket. He went upstairs again, unlocked his suit-case
and took out the packet of letters. He took out the folded page from
his pocket and slipped it under the string that held them together.

Then, at a sudden sound behind him, he wheeled round sharply. A
man was standing in the doorway, the kind of man whom Anthony had
fondly imagined existed only in the chorus of a Comic Opera. A
sinister-looking figure, with a squat brutal head and lips drawn back
in an evil grin.

“What the devil are you doing here?” asked Anthony. “And who let you
come up?”

“I pass where I please,” said the stranger. His voice was guttural and
foreign, though his English was idiomatic enough.

“Another Dago,” thought Anthony.

“Well, get out, do you hear?” he went on aloud.

The man’s eyes were fixed on the packet of letters which Anthony had
caught up.

“I will get out when you have given me what I have come for.”

“And what’s that, may I ask?”

The man took a step nearer.

“The Memoirs of Count Stylptitch,” he hissed.

“It’s impossible to take you seriously,” said Anthony. “You’re so
completely the stage villain. I like your get up very much. Who sent
you here? Baron Lollipop?”

“Baron——?” The man jerked out a string of harsh-sounding consonants.

“So that’s how you pronounce it, is it? A cross between gargling and
barking like a dog. I don’t think I could say it myself—my throat’s
not made that way. I shall have to go on calling him Lollipop. So he
sent you, did he?”

But he received a vehement negative. His visitor went so far as to spit
upon the suggestion in a very realistic manner. Then he drew from his
pocket a sheet of paper which he threw upon the table.

“Look,” he said. “Look and tremble, accursed Englishman.”

Anthony looked with some interest, not troubling to fulfil the latter
part of the command. On the paper was traced the crude design of a
human hand in red.

“It looks like a hand,” he remarked. “But, if you say so, I’m quite
prepared to admit that it’s a cubist picture of Sunset at the North
Pole.”

“It is the sign of the Comrades of the Red Hand. I am a Comrade of the
Red Hand.”

“You don’t say so,” said Anthony, looking at him with much interest.
“Are the others all like you? I don’t know what the Eugenic Society
would have to say about it.”

The man snarled angrily.

“Dog,” he said. “Worse than dog. Paid slave of an effete monarchy. Give
me the Memoirs, and you shall go unscathed. Such is the clemency of the
Brotherhood.”

“It’s very kind of them, I’m sure,” said Anthony, “but I’m afraid
that both they and you are labouring under a misapprehension. My
instructions are to deliver the manuscript—not to your amiable
Society, but to a certain firm of publishers.”

“Pah!” laughed the other. “Do you think you will ever be permitted to
reach that office alive? Enough of this fool’s talk. Hand over the
papers, or I shoot.”

He drew a revolver from his pocket and brandished it in the air.

But there he misjudged his Anthony Cade. He was not used to men who
could act as quickly—or quicker than they could think. Anthony did not
wait to be covered by the revolver. Almost as soon as the other got it
out of his pocket, Anthony had sprung forward and knocked it out of his
hand. The force of the blow sent the man swinging round, so that he
presented his back to his assailant.

The chance was too good to be missed. With one mighty, well-directed
kick, Anthony sent the man flying through the doorway into the
corridor, where he collapsed in a heap.

Anthony stepped out after him, but the doughty Comrade of the Red Hand
had had enough. He got nimbly to his feet and fled down the passage.
Anthony did not pursue him, but went back into his own room.

“So much for the Comrades of the Red Hand,” he remarked. “Picturesque
appearance, but easily routed by direct action. How the hell did that
fellow get in, I wonder? There’s one thing that stands out pretty
clearly—this isn’t going to be quite such a soft job as I thought.
I’ve already fallen foul of both the Loyalist and the Revolutionary
parties. Soon, I suppose, the Nationalists and the Independent Liberals
will be sending up a delegation. One thing’s fixed. I start on that
manuscript to-night.”

Looking at his watch, Anthony discovered that it was nearly nine
o’clock, and he decided to dine where he was. He did not anticipate
any more surprise visits, but he felt that it was up to him to be on
his guard. He had no intention of allowing his suit-case to be rifled
whilst he was downstairs in the Grill Room. He rang the bell and asked
for the Menu, selected a couple of dishes and ordered a bottle of
Bordeaux. The waiter took the order and withdrew.

Whilst he was waiting for the meal to arrive, he got out the package of
manuscript and put it on the table with the letters.

There was a knock at the door, and the waiter entered with a small
table and the accessories of the meal. Anthony had strolled over to the
mantelpiece. Standing there with his back to the room, he was directly
facing the mirror, and idly glancing in it he noticed a curious thing.

The waiter’s eyes were glued on the parcel of manuscript. Shooting
little glances sideways at Anthony’s immovable back, he moved softly
round the table. His hands were twitching, and he kept passing his
tongue over his dry lips. Anthony observed him more closely. He was a
tall man, supple like all waiters, with a clean-shaven, mobile face. An
Italian, Anthony thought, not a Frenchman.

At the critical moment Anthony wheeled round abruptly. The waiter
started slightly, but pretended to be doing something with the salt
cellar.

“What’s your name?” asked Anthony abruptly.

“Giuseppe, Monsieur.”

“Italian, eh?”

“Yes, Monsieur.”

Anthony spoke to him in that language, and the man answered fluently
enough. Finally Anthony dismissed him with a nod, but all the while
he was eating the excellent meal which Giuseppe served to him, he was
thinking rapidly.

Had he been mistaken? Was Giuseppe’s interest in the parcel just
ordinary curiosity? It might be so, but remembering the feverish
intensity of the man’s excitement, Anthony decided against that theory.
All the same, he was puzzled.

“Dash it all,” said Anthony to himself, “every one can’t be after the
blasted manuscript. Perhaps I’m fancying things.”

Dinner concluded and cleared away, he applied himself to the perusal of
the Memoirs. Owing to the illegibility of the late Count’s handwriting,
the business was a slow one. Anthony’s yawns succeeded one another with
suspicious rapidity. At the end of the fourth chapter, he gave it up.

So far, he had found the Memoirs insufferably dull, with no hint of
scandal of any kind.

He gathered up the letters and the wrapping of the manuscript which
were lying in a heap together on the table and locked them up in the
suit-case. Then he locked the door, and as an additional precaution put
a chair against it. On the chair he placed the water-bottle from the
bathroom.

Surveying these preparations with some pride, he undressed and got into
bed. He had one more shot at the Count’s Memoirs, but felt his eyelids
drooping, and stuffing the manuscript under his pillow, he switched out
the light and fell asleep almost immediately.

It must have been some four hours later that he awoke with a start.
What had awakened him he did not know—perhaps a sound, perhaps only
the consciousness of danger which in men who have led an adventurous
life is very fully developed.

For a moment he lay quite still, trying to focus his impressions. He
could hear a very stealthy rustle, and then he became aware of a denser
blackness somewhere between him and the window—on the floor by the
suit-case.

With a sudden spring, Anthony jumped out of bed, switching the light on
as he did so. A figure sprang up from where it had been kneeling by the
suit-case.

It was the waiter, Giuseppe. In his right hand gleamed a long thin
knife. He hurled himself straight upon Anthony, who was by now fully
conscious of his own danger. He was unarmed and Giuseppe was evidently
thoroughly at home with his own weapon.

Anthony sprang to one side, and Giuseppe missed him with the knife.
The next minute the two men were rolling on the floor together, locked
in a close embrace. The whole of Anthony’s faculties were centred on
keeping a close grip of Giuseppe’s right arm so that he would be unable
to use the knife. He bent it slowly back. At the same time he felt the
Italian’s other hand clutching at his windpipe, stifling him, choking.
And still, desperately, he bent the right arm back.

There was a sharp tinkle as the knife fell on the floor. At the same
time, the Italian extricated himself with a swift twist from Anthony’s
grasp. Anthony sprang up too, but made the mistake of moving towards
the door to cut off the other’s retreat. He saw, too late, that the
chair and the water-bottle were just as he had arranged them.

Giuseppe had entered by the window, and it was the window he made for
now. In the instant’s respite given him by Anthony’s move toward the
door, he had sprung out on the balcony, leaped over to the adjoining
balcony and had disappeared through the adjoining window.

Anthony knew well enough that it was of no use to pursue him. His
way of retreat was doubtless fully assured. Anthony would merely get
himself into trouble.

He walked over to the bed, thrusting his hand beneath the pillow and
drawing out the Memoirs. Lucky that they had been there and not in the
suit-case. He crossed over to the suit-case and looked inside, meaning
to take out the letters.

Then he swore softly under his breath.

_The letters were gone._




6

The Gentle Art of Blackmail


It was exactly five minutes to four when Virginia Revel, rendered
punctual by a healthy curiosity, returned to the house in Pont Street.
She opened the door with her latchkey, and stepped into the hall to be
immediately confronted by the impassive Chilvers.

“I beg pardon, ma’am, but a—a person has called to see you——”

For the moment, Virginia did not pay attention to the subtle
phraseology whereby Chilvers cloaked his meaning.

“Mr. Lomax? Where is he? In the drawing-room?”

“Oh, no, ma’am, not Mr. Lomax.” Chilvers’ tone was faintly reproachful.
“A person—I was reluctant to let him in, but he said his business
was most important—connected with the late Captain, I understood
him to say. Thinking therefore that you might wish to see him, I put
him—er—in the study.”

Virginia stood thinking for a minute. She had been a widow now for some
years, and the fact that she rarely spoke of her husband was taken by
some to indicate that below her careless demeanour was a still aching
wound. By others it was taken to mean the exact opposite, that Virginia
had never really cared for Tim Revel, and that she found it insincere
to profess a grief she did not feel.

“I should have mentioned, ma’am,” continued Chilvers, “that the man
appears to be some kind of foreigner.”

Virginia’s interest heightened a little. Her husband had been in the
Diplomatic Service, and they had been together in Herzoslovakia just
before the sensational murder of the King and Queen. This man might
probably be a Herzoslovakian, some old servant who had fallen on evil
days.

“You did quite right, Chilvers,” she said with a quick, approving nod.
“Where did you say you had put him? In the study?”

She crossed the hall with her light buoyant step, and opened the door
of the small room that flanked the dining-room.

The visitor was sitting in a chair by the fireplace. He rose on her
entrance and stood looking at her. Virginia had an excellent memory for
faces, and she was at once quite sure that she had never seen the man
before. He was tall and dark, supple in figure, and quite unmistakably
a foreigner; but she did not think he was of Slavonic origin. She put
him down as Italian or possibly Spanish.

“You wished to see me?” she asked. “I am Mrs. Revel.”

The man did not answer for a minute or two. He was looking her slowly
over, as though appraising her narrowly. There was a veiled insolence
in his manner which she was quick to feel.

“Will you please state your business?” she said, with a touch of
impatience.

“You are Mrs. Revel? Mrs. Timothy Revel?”

“Yes. I told you so just now.”

“Quite so. It is a good thing that you consented to see me, Mrs. Revel.
Otherwise, as I told your butler, I should have been compelled to do
business with your husband.”

Virginia looked at him in astonishment, but some impulse quelled the
retort that sprang to her lips. She contented herself by remarking
dryly:

“You might have found some difficulty in doing that.”

“I think not. I am very persistent. But I will come to the point.
Perhaps you recognize this?”

He flourished something in his hand. Virginia looked at it without much
interest.

“Can you tell me what it is, madame?”

“It appears to be a letter,” replied Virginia, who was by now convinced
that she had to do with a man who was mentally unhinged.

“And perhaps you note to whom it is addressed,” said the man
significantly, holding it out to her.

“I can read,” Virginia informed him pleasantly. “It is addressed to a
Captain O’Neill at Rue de Quenelles No. 15, Paris.”

The man seemed searching her face hungrily for something he did not
find.

“Will you read it, please?”

Virginia took the envelope from him, drew out the enclosure and glanced
at it; but almost immediately she stiffened and held it out to him
again.

“This is a private letter—certainly not meant for my eyes.”

The man laughed sardonically.

“I congratulate you, Mrs. Revel, on your admirable acting. You play
your part to perfection. Nevertheless, I think that you will hardly be
able to deny the signature!”

“The signature?”

Virginia turned the letter over—and was struck dumb with astonishment.
The signature, written in a delicate slanting hand, was Virginia Revel.
Checking the exclamation of astonishment that rose to her lips, she
turned again to the beginning of the letter and deliberately read the
whole thing through. Then she stood a minute lost in thought. The
nature of the letter made it clear enough what was in prospect.

“Well, madame?” said the man. “That is your name, is it not?”

“Oh, yes,” said Virginia. “It’s my name.” “But not my handwriting,” she
might have added.

Instead she turned a dazzling smile upon her visitor.

“Supposing,” she said sweetly, “we sit down and talk it over?”

He was puzzled. Not so had he expected her to behave. His instinct
told him that she was not afraid of him.

“First of all, I should like to know how you found me out?”

“That was easy.”

He took from his pocket a page torn from an illustrated paper, and
handed it to her. Anthony Cade would have recognized it.

She gave it back to him with a thoughtful little frown.

“I see,” she said. “It was very easy.”

“Of course you understand, Mrs. Revel, that that is not the only
letter. There are others.”

“Dear me,” said Virginia, “I seem to have been frightfully indiscreet.”

Again she could see that her light tone puzzled him. She was by now
thoroughly enjoying herself.

“At any rate,” she said, smiling sweetly at him, “it’s very kind of you
to call and give them back to me.”

There was a pause as he cleared his throat.

“I am a poor man, Mrs. Revel,” he said at last, with a good deal of
significance in his manner.

“As such you will doubtless find it easier to enter the Kingdom of
Heaven, or so I have always heard.”

“I cannot afford to let you have these letters for nothing.”

“I think you are under a misapprehension. Those letters are the
property of the person who wrote them.”

“That may be the law, madame, but in this country you have a saying
‘Possession is nine points of the law.’ And, in any case, are you
prepared to invoke the aid of the law?”

“The law is a severe one for blackmailers,” Virginia reminded him.

“Come, Mrs. Revel, I am not quite a fool. I have read these
letters—the letters of a woman to her lover, one and all breathing
dread of discovery by her husband. Do you want me to take them to your
husband?”

“You have overlooked one possibility. Those letters were written some
years ago. Supposing that since then—I have become a widow.”

He shook his head with confidence.

“In that case—if you had nothing to fear—you would not be sitting
here making terms with me.”

Virginia smiled.

“What is your price?” she asked in a business-like manner.

“For one thousand pounds I will hand the whole packet over to you. It
is very little that I am asking there; but, you see, I do not like the
business.”

“I shouldn’t dream of paying you a thousand pounds,” said Virginia with
decision.

“Madame, I never bargain. A thousand pounds, and I will place the
letters in your hands.”

Virginia reflected.

“You must give me a little time to think it over. It will not be easy
for me to get such a sum together.”

“A few pounds on account perhaps—say fifty—and I will call again.”

Virginia looked up at the clock. It was five minutes past four, and she
fancied that she had heard the bell.

“Very well,” she said hurriedly. “Come back to-morrow, but later than
this. About six.”

She crossed over to a desk that stood against the wall, unlocked one of
the drawers, and took out an untidy handful of notes.

“There is about forty pounds here. That will have to do for you.”

He snatched at it eagerly.

“And now go at once, please,” said Virginia.

He left the room obediently enough. Through the open door, Virginia
caught a glimpse of George Lomax in the hall, just being ushered
upstairs by Chilvers. As the front door closed, Virginia called to him.

“Come in here, George. Chilvers, bring us tea in here, will you please?”

She flung open both windows, and George Lomax came into the room to
find her standing erect with dancing eyes and wind-blown hair.

“I’ll shut them in a minute, George, but I felt the room ought to be
aired. Did you fall over the blackmailer in the hall?”

“The what?”

“Blackmailer, George. B.L.A.C.K.M.A.I.L.E.R? Blackmailer. One who
blackmails.”

“My dear Virginia, you can’t be serious!”

“Oh, but I am, George.”

“But who did he come here to blackmail?”

“Me, George.”

“But, my dear Virginia, what have you been doing?”

“Well, just for once, as it happens, I hadn’t been doing anything. The
good gentleman mistook me for someone else.”

“You rang up the police, I suppose?”

“No, I didn’t. I suppose you think I ought to have done so.”

“Well——” George considered weightily. “No, no, perhaps not—perhaps
you acted wisely. You might be mixed up in some unpleasant publicity in
connection with the case. You might even have had to give evidence——”

“I should have liked that,” said Virginia. “I would love to be
summoned, and I should like to see if judges really do make all the
rotten jokes you read about. It would be most exciting. I was at Vine
Street the other day to see about a diamond brooch I had lost, and
there was the most perfectly lovely inspector—the nicest man I ever
met.”

George, as was his custom, let all irrelevancies pass.

“But what did you do about this scoundrel?”

“Well, George, I’m afraid I let him do it.”

“Do what?”

“Blackmail me.”

George’s face of horror was so poignant that Virginia had to bite her
under lip.

“You mean—do I understand you to mean—that you did not correct the
misapprehension under which he was labouring?”

Virginia shook her head, shooting a sideways glance at him.

“Good heavens, Virginia, you must be mad.”

“I suppose it would seem that way to you.”

“But why? In God’s name, why?”

“Several reasons. To begin with he was doing it so
beautifully—blackmailing me, I mean—I hate to interrupt an artist
when he’s doing his job really well. And then, you see, I’d never been
blackmailed——”

“I should hope not, indeed.”

“And I wanted to see what it felt like.”

“I am quite at a loss to comprehend you, Virginia.”

“I knew you wouldn’t understand.”

“You did not give him money, I hope?”

“Just a trifle,” said Virginia apologetically.

“How much?”

“Forty pounds.”

“Virginia!”

“My dear George, it’s only what I pay for an evening dress. It’s just
as exciting to buy a new experience as it is to buy a new dress—more
so, in fact.”

George Lomax merely shook his head, and Chilvers appearing at that
moment with the tea urn, he was saved from having to express his
outraged feelings. When tea had been brought in, and Virginia’s deft
fingers were manipulating the heavy silver teapot, she spoke again on
the subject.

“I had another motive too, George—a brighter and better one. We women
are usually supposed to be cats, but at any rate I’d done another woman
a good turn this afternoon. This man isn’t likely to go off looking
for another Virginia Revel. He thinks he’s found his bird all right.
Poor little devil, she was in a blue funk when she wrote that letter.
Mr. Blackmailer would have had the easiest job of his life there.
Now, though he doesn’t know it, he’s up against a tough proposition.
Starting with the great advantage of having led a blameless life, I
shall toy with him to his undoing—as they say in books. Guile, George,
lots of guile.”

George still shook his head.

“I don’t like it,” he persisted. “I don’t like it.”

“Well, never mind, George dear. You didn’t come here to talk about
blackmailers. What did you come here for, by the way? Correct answer:
‘To see _you_!’ Accent on the you, and press her hand with significance
unless you happen to have been eating heavily buttered muffin, in which
case it must all be done with the eyes.”

“I did come to see you,” replied George seriously. “And I am glad to
find you alone.”

“Oh, George, this is so sudden,” says she, swallowing a currant.

“I wanted to ask a favour of you. I have always considered you,
Virginia, as a woman of considerable charm.”

“Oh, George!”

“And also a woman of intelligence!”

“Not really? How well the man knows me.”

“My dear Virginia, there is a young fellow arriving in England
to-morrow whom I should like you to meet.”

“All right, George, but it’s your party—let that be clearly
understood.”

“You could, I feel sure, if you chose, exercise your considerable
charm.”

Virginia cocked her head a little on one side.

“George, dear, I don’t ‘charm’ as a profession, you know. Often I like
people—and then, well, they like me. But I don’t think I could set
out in cold blood to fascinate a helpless stranger. That sort of thing
isn’t done, George, it really isn’t. There are professional sirens who
would do it much better than I should.”

“That is out of the question, Virginia. This young man, he is a
Canadian, by the way, of the name of McGrath——”

“A Canadian of Scotch descent,” says she, deducing brilliantly.

“Is probably quite unused to the higher walks of English society. I
should like him to appreciate the charm and distinction of a real
English gentlewoman.”

“Meaning me?”

“Exactly.”

“Why?”

“I beg your pardon?”

“I said why? You don’t boom the real English gentlewoman with every
stray Canadian who sets foot upon our shores. What is the deep idea,
George? To put it vulgarly, what do _you_ get out of it?”

“I cannot see that that concerns you, Virginia.”

“I couldn’t possibly go out for an evening and fascinate, unless I knew
all the whys and wherefors.”

“You have a most extraordinary way of putting things, Virginia. Anyone
would think——”

“Wouldn’t they? Come on, George, part with a little more information.”

“My dear Virginia, matters are likely to be a little strained shortly
in a certain Central European nation. It is important, for reasons
which are immaterial, that this—Mr.—er McGrath should be brought
to realize that the restoring of the Monarchy in Herzoslovakia is
imperative to the peace of Europe.”

“The part about the peace of Europe is all bosh,” said Virginia calmly,
“but I’m all for Monarchies every time, especially for a picturesque
people like the Herzoslovakians. So you’re running a King in the
Herzoslovakian States, are you? Who is he?”

George was reluctant to answer, but did not see his way to avoid the
question. The interview was not going at all as he had planned. He
had foreseen Virginia as a willing, docile tool, receiving his hints
gratefully, and asking no awkward questions. This was far from being
the case. She seemed determined to know all about it and this George,
ever doubtful of female discretion, was determined at all costs to
avoid. He had made a mistake. Virginia was not the woman for the
part. She might, indeed, cause serious trouble. Her account of her
interview with the blackmailer had caused him grave apprehension. A
most undependable creature, with no idea of treating serious matters
seriously.

“Prince Michael Obolovitch,” he replied, as Virginia was obviously
waiting for an answer to her question. “But please let that go no
further.”

“Don’t be absurd, George. There are all sort of hints in the papers
already, and articles cracking up the Obolovitch dynasty and talking
about the murdered Nicholas IV as though he were a cross between
a Saint and a hero instead of a stupid little man besotted by a
third-rate actress.”

George winced. He was more than ever convinced that he had made a
mistake in enlisting Virginia’s aid. He must stave her off quickly.

“You are right, my dear Virginia,” he said hastily, as he rose to his
feet to bid her farewell. “I should not have made the suggestion I did
to you. But we are anxious for the Dominions to see eye to eye with us
on this Herzoslovakian crisis, and McGrath has, I believe, influence in
journalistic circles. As an ardent Monarchist, and with your knowledge
of the country, I thought it a good plan for you to meet him.”

“So that’s the explanation, is it?”

“Yes, but I dare say you wouldn’t have cared for him.”

Virginia looked at him for a second and then she laughed.

“George,” she said, “you’re a rotten liar.”

“Virginia!”

“Rotten, absolutely rotten! If I had had your training, I could
have managed a better one than that—one that had a chance of being
believed. But I shall find out all about it, my poor George. Rest
assured of that. The Mystery of Mr. McGrath. I shouldn’t wonder if I
got a hint or two at Chimneys this week-end.”

“At Chimneys? You are going to Chimneys?”

George could not conceal his perturbation. He had hoped to reach Lord
Caterham in time for the invitation to remain unissued.

“Bundle rang up and asked me this morning.”

George made a last effort.

“Rather a dull party, I believe,” he said. “Hardly in your line,
Virginia.”

“My poor George, why didn’t you tell me the truth and trust me? It’s
still not too late.”

George took her hand and dropped it again limply.

“I have told you the truth,” he said coldly, and he said it without a
blush.

“That’s a better one,” said Virginia approvingly. “But it’s still
not good enough. Cheer up, George, I shall be at Chimneys all right,
exerting my considerable charm—as you put it. Life has become suddenly
very much more amusing. First a blackmailer, and then George in
diplomatic difficulties. Will he tell all to the beautiful woman who
asks for his confidence so pathetically? No, he will reveal nothing
until the last chapter. Good-bye, George. One last fond look before you
go? No? Oh, George, dear, don’t be sulky about it!”

Virginia ran to the telephone as soon as George had departed with a
heavy gait through the front door.

She obtained the number she required and asked to speak to Lady Eileen
Brent.

“Is that you, Bundle? I’m coming to Chimneys all right to-morrow. What?
Bore me? No, it won’t. Bundle, wild horses wouldn’t keep me away! So
there!”




7

Mr. McGrath Refuses an Invitation


The letters were gone!

Having once made up his mind to the fact of their disappearance, there
was nothing to do but accept it. Anthony realized very well that he
could not pursue Giuseppe through the corridors of the Blitz Hotel. To
do so was to court undesired publicity, and in all probability to fail
in his object all the same.

He came to the conclusion that Giuseppe had mistaken the packet of
letters, enclosed as they were in the other wrappings, for the Memoirs
themselves. It was likely therefore that when he discovered his mistake
he would make another attempt to get hold of the Memoirs. For this
attempt Anthony intended to be fully prepared.

Another plan that occurred to him was to advertize discreetly for the
return of the package of letters. Supposing Giuseppe to be an emissary
of the Comrades of the Red Hand, or, which seemed to Anthony more
probable, to be employed by the Loyalist party, the letters could have
no possible interest for either employer and he would probably jump at
the chance of obtaining a small sum of money for their return.

Having thought out all this, Anthony returned to bed and slept
peacefully until morning. He did not fancy that Giuseppe would be
anxious for a second encounter that night.

Anthony got up with his plan of campaign fully thought out. He had
a good breakfast, glanced at the papers which were full of the new
discoveries of oil in Herzoslovakia, and then demanded an interview
with the manager, and, being Anthony Cade, with a gift for getting his
own way by means of quiet determination, he obtained what he asked for.

The manager, a Frenchman with an exquisitely suave manner, received him
in his private office.

“You wished to see me, I understand, Mr.—er—McGrath?”

“I did. I arrived at your hotel yesterday afternoon, and I had dinner
served to me in my own rooms by a waiter whose name was Giuseppe.”

He paused.

“I dare say we have a waiter of that name,” agreed the manager
indifferently.

“I was struck by something unusual in the waiter’s manner, but thought
nothing more of it at the time. Later, in the night, I was awakened by
the sound of some one moving softly about the room. I switched on the
light, and found this same Giuseppe in the act of rifling my leather
suit-case.”

The manager’s indifference had completely disappeared now.

“But I have heard nothing of this,” he exclaimed. “Why was I not
informed sooner?”

“The man and I had a brief struggle—he was armed with a knife by the
way. In the end he succeeded in making off by way of the window.”

“What did you do then, Mr. McGrath?”

“I examined the contents of my suit-case.”

“Had anything been taken?”

“Nothing of—importance,” said Anthony slowly.

The manager leaned back with a sigh.

“I am glad of that,” he remarked. “But you will allow me to say, Mr.
McGrath, that I do not quite understand your attitude in the matter.
You made no attempt to arouse the hotel? To pursue the thief?”

Anthony shrugged his shoulders.

“Nothing of value had been taken, as I tell you. I am aware, of
course, that strictly speaking it is a case for the police——”

He paused, and the manager murmured without any particular enthusiasm:

“For the police—of course——”

“In any case, I was fairly certain that the man would manage to make
good his escape, and since nothing was taken why bother with the
police?”

The manager smiled a little.

“I see that you realize, Mr. McGrath, that I am not at all anxious
to have the police called in. From my point of view it is always
disastrous. If the newspapers can get hold of anything connected with
a big fashionable hotel such as this, they always run it for all it is
worth, no matter how insignificant the real subject matter may be.”

“Quite so,” agreed Anthony. “Now I told you that nothing of value had
been taken, and that was perfectly true in a sense. Nothing of any
value to the thief was taken, but he got hold of something which is of
considerable value to me.”

“Ah?”

“Letters, you understand.”

An expression of superhuman discretion, only to be achieved by a
Frenchman, settled down upon the manager’s face.

“I comprehend,” he murmured. “But perfectly. Naturally, it is not a
matter for the police.”

“We are quite agreed upon that point. But you will understand that
I have every intention of recovering these letters. In the part of
the world where I come from, people are used to doing things for
themselves. What I require from you therefore is the fullest possible
information you can give me about this waiter, Giuseppe.”

“I see no objection to that,” said the manager after a moment or two’s
pause. “I cannot give you the information offhand, of course, but if
you will return in half an hour’s time I will have everything ready to
lay before you.”

“Thank you very much. That will suit me admirably.”

In half an hour’s time, Anthony returned to the office again to find
that the manager had been as good as his word. Jotted down upon a piece
of paper were all the relevant facts known about Giuseppe Manelli.

“He came to us, you see, about three months ago. A skilled and
experienced waiter. Has given complete satisfaction. He has been in
England about five years.”

Together the two men ran over a list of the hotels and restaurants
where the Italian had worked. One fact struck Anthony as being possibly
of significance. At two of the hotels in question there had been
serious robberies during the time that Giuseppe was employed there,
though no suspicion of any kind had attached to him in either case.
Still, the fact was significant.

Was Giuseppe merely a clever hotel thief? Had his search of Anthony’s
suit-case been merely part of his habitual professional tactics? He
might just possibly have had the packet of letters in his hand at the
moment when Anthony switched on the light, and have shoved it into his
pocket mechanically so as to have his hands free. In that case, the
thing was mere plain or garden robbery.

Against that, there was to be put the man’s excitement of the evening
before when he had caught sight of the papers lying on the table. There
had been no money or object of value there such as would excite the
cupidity of an ordinary thief.

No, Anthony felt convinced that Giuseppe had been acting as a tool
for some outside agency. With the information supplied to him by the
manager, it might be possible to learn something about Giuseppe’s
private life, and so finally track him down. He gathered up the sheet
of paper and rose.

“Thank you very much indeed. It’s quite unnecessary to ask, I suppose,
whether Giuseppe is still in the hotel?”

The manager smiled.

“His bed was not slept in, and all his things have been left behind. He
must have rushed straight out after his attack upon you. I don’t think
there is much chance of our seeing him again.”

“I imagine not. Well, thank you very much indeed. I shall be staying on
here for the present.”

“I hope you will be successful in your task, but I confess that I am
rather doubtful.”

“I always hope for the best.”

One of Anthony’s first proceedings was to question some of the other
waiters who had been friendly with Giuseppe, but he obtained very
little to go upon. He wrote out an advertisement on the lines he had
planned, and had it sent to five of the most widely read newspapers. He
was just about to go out and visit the restaurant at which Giuseppe had
been previously employed when the telephone rang. Anthony took up the
receiver.

“Hullo, what is it?”

A toneless voice replied.

“Am I speaking to Mr. McGrath?”

“You are. Who are you?”

“This is Messrs. Balderson and Hodgkins. Just a minute, please. I will
put you through to Mr. Balderson.”

“Our worthy publishers,” thought Anthony. “So they are getting worried
too, are they? They needn’t. There’s a week to run still.”

A hearty voice struck suddenly upon his ear.

“Hullo! That Mr. McGrath?”

“Speaking.”

“I’m Mr. Balderson of Balderson and Hodgkins. What about that
manuscript, Mr. McGrath?”

“Well,” said Anthony, “what about it?”

“Everything about it. I understand, Mr. McGrath, that you have just
arrived in this country from South Africa. That being so, you can’t
possibly understand the position. There’s going to be trouble about
that manuscript, Mr. McGrath, big trouble. Sometimes I wish we’d never
said we’d handle it.”

“Indeed?”

“I assure you it’s so. At present I’m anxious to get it into my
possession as quickly as possible, so as to have a couple of copies
made. Then, if the original is destroyed—well, no harm will be done.”

“Dear me,” said Anthony.

“Yes, I expect it sounds absurd to you, Mr. McGrath. But, I assure
you, you don’t appreciate the situation. There’s a determined effort
being made to prevent its ever reaching this office. I say to you quite
frankly and without humbug that if you attempt to bring it yourself
it’s ten to one that you’ll never get here.”

“I doubt that,” said Anthony. “When I want to get anywhere, I usually
do.”

“You’re up against a very dangerous lot of people. I wouldn’t have
believed it myself a month ago. I tell you, Mr. McGrath, we’ve been
bribed and threatened and cajoled by one lot and another until we don’t
know whether we’re on our heads or our heels. My suggestion is that you
do not attempt to bring the manuscript here. One of our people will
call upon you at the hotel and take possession of it.”

“And supposing the gang does him in?” asked Anthony.

“The responsibility would then be ours—not yours. You would have
delivered it to our representative and obtained a written discharge.
The cheque for—er—a thousand pounds which we are instructed to hand
to you will not be available until Wednesday next by the terms of our
agreement with the executors of the late—er—author—you know whom I
mean, but if you insist I will send my own cheque for that amount by
the messenger.”

Anthony reflected for a minute or two. He had intended to keep the
Memoirs until the last day of grace, because he was anxious to see for
himself what all the fuss was about. Nevertheless, he realized the
force of the publisher’s arguments.

“All right,” he said, with a little sigh. “Have it your own way. Send
your man along. And if you don’t mind sending that cheque as well
I’d rather have it now, as I may be going out of England before next
Wednesday.”

“Certainly, Mr. McGrath. Our representative will call upon you first
thing to-morrow morning. It will be wiser not to send anyone direct
from the office. Our Mr. Holmes lives in South London. He will call
in on his way to us, and will give you a receipt for the package. I
suggest that to-night you should place a dummy packet in the manager’s
safe. Your enemies will get to hear of this, and it will prevent any
attack being made upon your apartments to-night.”

“Very well, I will do as you direct.”

Anthony hung up the receiver with a thoughtful face.

Then he went on with his interrupted plan of seeking news of the
slippery Giuseppe. He drew a complete blank, however. Giuseppe had
worked at the restaurant in question, but nobody seemed to know
anything of his private life or associates.

“But I’ll get you, my lad,” murmured Anthony, between his teeth. “I’ll
get you yet. It’s only a matter of time.”

His second night in London was entirely peaceful.

At nine o’clock the following morning, the card of Mr. Holmes from
Messrs. Balderson and Hodgkins was sent up, and Mr. Holmes followed
it. A small, fair man with a quiet manner. Anthony handed over the
manuscript, and received in exchange a cheque for a thousand pounds.
Mr. Holmes packed up the manuscript in the small brown bag he carried,
wished Anthony good morning, and departed. The whole thing seemed very
tame.

“But perhaps he’ll be murdered on the way there,” Anthony murmured
aloud, as he stared idly out of the window. “I wonder now—I very much
wonder.”

He put the cheque in an envelope, enclosed a few lines of writing
with it, and sealed it up carefully. Jimmy, who had been more or less
in funds at the time of his encounter with Anthony at Bulawayo, had
advanced him a substantial sum of money which was, as yet, practically
untouched.

“If one’s job’s done with, the other isn’t,” said Anthony to himself.
“Up to now, I’ve bungled it. But never say die. I think that, suitably
disguised, I shall go and have a look at 487, Pont Street.”

He packed his belongings, went down and paid his bill, and ordered his
luggage to be put on a taxi. Suitably rewarding those who stood in his
path, most of whom had done nothing whatever materially to add to his
comfort, he was on the point of being driven off, when a small boy
rushed down the steps with a letter.

“Just come for you, this very minute, sir.”

With a sigh, Anthony produced yet another shilling. The taxi groaned
heavily and jumped forward with a hideous crashing of gears, and
Anthony opened the letter.

It was rather a curious document. He had to read it four times before
he could be sure of what it was all about. Put in plain English (the
letter was not in plain English, but in the peculiar involved style
common to missives issued by Government officials) it presumed that Mr.
McGrath was arriving in England from South Africa to-day—Thursday, it
referred obliquely to the Memoirs of Count Stylptitch, and begged Mr.
McGrath to do nothing in the matter until he had had a confidential
conversation with Mr. George Lomax, and certain other parties whose
magnificence was vaguely hinted at. It also contained a definite
invitation to go down to Chimneys as the guest of Lord Caterham, on the
following day, Friday.

A mysterious and thoroughly obscure communication. Anthony enjoyed it
very much.

“Dear old England,” he murmured affectionately. “Two days behind the
times, as usual. Rather a pity. Still, I can’t go down to Chimneys
under false pretences. I wonder, though, if there’s an inn handy? Mr.
Anthony Cade might stay at the inn without anyone being the wiser.”

He leaned out of the window, and gave new directions to the taxi
driver, who acknowledged them with a snort of contempt.

The taxi drew up before one of London’s more obscure hostelries. The
fare, however, was paid on a scale befitting its point of departure.

Having booked a room in the name of Anthony Cade, Anthony passed into
a dingy writing-room, took out a sheet of notepaper stamped with the
legend Hotel Blitz, and wrote rapidly.

He explained that he had arrived on the preceding Tuesday, that he
had handed over the manuscript in question to Messrs. Balderson and
Hodgkins, and he regretfully declined the kind invitation of Lord
Caterham as he was leaving England almost immediately. He signed the
letter “Yours faithfully, James McGrath.”

“And now,” said Anthony, as he affixed the stamp to the envelope. “To
business. Exit James McGrath, and Enter Anthony Cade.”




8

A Dead Man


On that same Thursday afternoon Virginia Revel had been playing tennis
at Ranelagh. All the way back to Pont Street, as she lay back in the
long, luxurious limousine, a little smile played upon her lips, as
she rehearsed her part in the forthcoming interview. Of course it
was within the bounds of possibility that the blackmailer might not
reappear, but she felt pretty certain that he would. She had shown
herself an easy prey. Well, perhaps this time there would be a little
surprise for him!

When the car drew up at the house, she turned to speak to the chauffeur
before going up the steps.

“How’s your wife, Walton? I forgot to ask.”

“Better I think, ma’am. The doctor said he’d look in and see her about
half-past six. Will you be wanting the car again?”

Virginia reflected for a minute.

“I shall be away for the week-end. I’m going by the 6.40 from
Paddington, but I shan’t need you again—a taxi will do for that. I’d
rather you saw the doctor. If he thinks it would do your wife good to
go away for the week-end, take her somewhere, Walton. I’ll stand the
expense.”

Cutting short the man’s thanks with an impatient nod of the head,
Virginia ran up the steps, delved into her bag in search of her
latchkey, remembered she hadn’t got it with her, and hastily rang the
bell.

It was not answered at once, but as she waited there a young man came
up the steps. He was shabbily dressed, and carried in his hand a sheaf
of leaflets. He held one out to Virginia with the legend on it plainly
visible: “Why Did I Serve my Country?” In his left hand he held a
collecting-box.

“I can’t buy two of those awful poems in one day,” said Virginia
pleadingly. “I bought one this morning. I did, indeed, honour bright.”

The young man threw back his head and laughed. Virginia laughed with
him. Running her eyes carelessly over him, she thought him a more
pleasing specimen than usual of London’s unemployed. She liked his
brown face, and the lean hardness of him. She went so far as to wish
she had a job for him.

But at that moment the door opened, and immediately Virginia forgot all
about the problem of the unemployed, for to her astonishment the door
was opened by her own maid, Élise.

“Where’s Chilvers?” she demanded sharply, as she stepped into the hall.

“But he is gone, madame, with the others.”

“What others? Gone where?”

“But to Datchet, madame—to the cottage, as your telegram said.”

“My telegram?” said Virginia, utterly at sea.

“Did not madame send a telegram? Surely there can be no mistake. It
came but an hour ago.”

“I never sent any telegram. What did it say?”

“I believe it is still on the table _là-bas_.”

Élise retired, pounced upon it, and brought it to her mistress in
triumph.

“_Voilà_, madame!”

The telegram was addressed to Chilvers and ran as follows:

“Please take household down to cottage at once, and make preparations
for week-end party there. Catch 5.49 train.”

There was nothing unusual about it, it was just the sort of message she
herself had frequently sent before, when she had arranged a party at
her riverside bungalow on the spur of the moment. She always took the
whole household down, leaving an old woman as caretaker. Chilvers would
not have seen anything wrong with the message, and like a good servant
had carried out his orders faithfully enough.

“Me, I remained,” explained Élise, “knowing that madame would wish me
to pack for her.”

“It’s a silly hoax,” cried Virginia, flinging down the telegram
angrily. “You know perfectly well, Élise, that I am going to Chimneys.
I told you so this morning.”

“I thought madame had changed her mind. Sometimes that does happen,
does it not, madame?”

Virginia admitted the truth of the accusation with a half smile. She
was busy trying to find a reason for this extraordinary practical joke.
Élise cut forward a suggestion.

“_Mon Dieu!_” she cried, clasping her hands. “If it should be the
malefactors, the thieves! They send the bogus telegram and get the
_domestiques_ all out of the house, and then they rob it.”

“I suppose that might be it,” said Virginia doubtfully.

“Yes, yes, madame, that is it without a doubt. Every day you read in
the papers of such things. Madame will ring up the police at once—at
once—before they arrive and cut our throats.”

“Don’t get so excited, Élise. They won’t come and cut our throats at
six o’clock in the afternoon.”

“Madame, I implore you, let me run out and fetch a policeman now, at
once.”

“What on earth for? Don’t be silly, Élise. Go up and pack my things
for Chimneys if you haven’t already done it. The new Cailleuax evening
dress, and the white crêpe marocain, and—yes, the black velvet—black
velvet is so political, is it not?”

“Madame looks ravishing in the eau de nil satin,” suggested Élise, her
professional instincts reasserting themselves.

“No, I won’t take that. Hurry up, Élise, there’s a good girl. We’ve got
very little time. I’ll send a wire to Chilvers at Datchet, and I’ll
speak to the policeman on the beat as we go out and tell him to keep an
eye on the place. Don’t start rolling your eyes again, Élise—if you
get so frightened before anything has happened, what would you do if a
man jumped out from some dark corner and stuck a knife into you?”

Élise gave vent to a shrill squeak, and beat a speedy retreat up the
stairs, darting nervous glances over each shoulder as she went.

Virginia made a face at her retreating back, and crossed the hall to
the little study where the telephone was. Élise’s suggestion of ringing
up the police station seemed to her a good one, and she intended to act
upon it without any further delay.

She opened the study door and crossed to the telephone. Then, with
her hand on the receiver, she stopped. A man was sitting in the big
arm-chair, sitting in a curious huddled position. In the stress of the
moment, she had forgotten all about her expected visitor. Apparently he
had fallen asleep whilst waiting for her.

She came right up to the chair, a slightly mischievous smile upon her
face. And then suddenly the smile faded.

The man was not asleep. _He was dead._

She knew it at once, knew it instinctively even before her eyes had
seen and noted the small shining pistol lying on the floor, the
little-singed hole just above the heart with the dark stain round it,
and the horrible dropped jaw.

She stood quite still, her hands pressed to her sides. In the silence
she heard Élise running down the stairs.

“Madame! Madame!”

“Well, what is it?”

She moved quickly to the door. Her whole instinct was to conceal what
had happened—for the moment anyway—from Élise. Élise would promptly
go into hysterics, she knew that well enough, and she felt a great need
for calm and quiet in which to think things out.

“Madame, would it not be better if I should draw the chain across the
door? These malefactors, at any minute they may arrive.”

“Yes, if you like. Anything you like.”

She heard the rattle of the chain, and then Élise running upstairs
again, and drew a long breath of relief.

She looked at the man in the chair and then at the telephone. Her
course was quite clear, she must ring up the police at once.

But still she did not do so. She stood quite still, paralysed with
horror and with a host of conflicting ideas rushing through her brain.
The bogus telegram. Had it something to do with this? Supposing
Élise had not stayed behind? She would have let herself in—that is,
presuming she had had her latchkey with her as usual, to find herself
alone in the house with a murdered man—a man whom she had permitted to
blackmail her on a former occasion. Of course she had an explanation of
that; but thinking of that explanation she was not quite easy in her
mind. She remembered how frankly incredible George had found it. Would
other people think the same. Those letters now—of course she hadn’t
written them, but would it be so easy to prove that?

She put her hands on her forehead, squeezing them tight together.

“I must think,” said Virginia. “I simply must think.”

Who had let the man in? Surely not Élise. If she had done so, she would
have been sure to have mentioned the fact at once. The whole thing
seemed more and more mysterious as she thought about it. There was
really only one thing to be done—ring up the police.

She stretched out her hand to the telephone, and suddenly she thought
of George. A man—that was what she wanted—an ordinary level-headed,
unemotional man who would see things in their proper proportion and
point out to her the best course to take.

Then she shook her head. Not George. The first thing George would think
of would be his own position. He would hate being mixed up in this
kind of business. George wouldn’t do at all.

Then her face softened. Bill, of course! Without more ado, she rang up
Bill.

She was informed that he had left half an hour ago for Chimneys.

“Oh, damn!” cried Virginia, jamming down the receiver. It was horrible
to be shut up with a dead body and to have no one to speak to.

And at that minute the front-door bell rang.

Virginia jumped. In a few minutes it rang again. Élise, she knew, was
upstairs packing and wouldn’t hear it.

Virginia went out in the hall, drew back the chain, and undid all the
bolts that Élise had fastened in her zeal. Then, with a long breath,
she threw open the door. On the steps was the unemployed young man.

Virginia plunged headlong with a relief born of overstrung nerves.

“Come in,” she said. “I think that perhaps I’ve got a job for you.”

She took him into the dining-room, pulled toward a chair for him, sat
down herself facing him, and stared at him very attentively.

“Excuse me,” she said, “but are you—I mean——”

“Eton and Oxford,” said the young man. “That’s what you wanted to ask
me, wasn’t it?”

“Something of the kind,” admitted Virginia.

“Come down in the world entirely through my own incapacity to stick to
regular work. This isn’t regular work you’re offering me, I hope?”

A smile hovered for a moment on her lips.

“It’s very irregular.”

“Good,” said the young man in a tone of satisfaction.

Virginia noted his bronzed face and long lean body with approval.

“You see,” she explained, “I’m in rather a hole, and most of my friends
are—well, rather high up. They’ve all got something to lose.”

“I’ve nothing whatever to lose. So go ahead. What’s the trouble?”

“There’s a dead man in the next room,” said Virginia. “He’s been
murdered, and I don’t know what to do about it.”

She blurted out the words as simply as a child might have done.
The young man went up enormously in her estimation by the way he
accepted her statement. He might have been used to hearing a similar
announcement made every day of his life.

“Excellent,” he said, with a trace of enthusiasm. “I’ve always wanted
to do a bit of amateur detective work. Shall we go and view the body,
or will you give me the facts first?”

“I think I’d better give you the facts.” She paused for a moment to
consider how best to condense her story, and then began, speaking
quietly and concisely.

“This man came to the house for the first time yesterday and asked to
see me. He had certain letters with him—love letters, signed with my
name——”

“But which weren’t written by you,” put in the young man quietly.

Virginia looked at him in some astonishment

“How did you know that?”

“Oh, I deduced it. But go on.”

“He wanted to blackmail me—and I—well, I don’t know if you’ll
understand, but I—let him.”

She looked at him appealingly, and he nodded his head reassuringly.

“Of course I understand. You wanted to see what it felt like.”

“How frightfully clever of you! That’s just what I did feel.”

“I _am_ clever,” said the young man modestly. “But, mind you, very
few people would understand that point of view. Most people, you see,
haven’t got any imagination.”

“I suppose that’s so. I told this man to come back to-day—at six
o’clock. I arrived home from Ranelagh to find that a bogus telegram had
got all the servants except my maid out of the house. Then I walked
into the study and found the man shot.”

“Who let him in?”

“I don’t know. I think if my maid had done so she would have told me.”

“Does she know what has happened?”

“I have told her nothing.”

The young man nodded, and rose to his feet.

“And now to view the body,” he said briskly. “But I’ll tell you
this—on the whole it’s always best to tell the truth. One lie involves
you in such a lot of lies—and continuous lying is so monotonous.”

“Then you advise me to ring up the police?”

“Probably. But we’ll just have a look at the fellow first.”

Virginia led the way out the room. On the threshold she paused, looking
back at him.

“By the way,” she said, “you haven’t told me your name yet?”

“My name? My name’s Anthony Cade.”




9

Anthony Disposes of a Body


Anthony followed Virginia out of the room, smiling a little to himself.
Events had taken quite an unexpected turn. But as he bent over the
figure in the chair he grew grave again.

“He’s still warm,” he said sharply. “He was killed less than half an
hour ago.”

“Just before I came in?”

“Exactly.”

He stood upright, drawing his brows together in a frown. Then he asked
a question of which Virginia did not at once see the drift:

“Your maid’s not been in this room, of course?”

“No.”

“Does she know that you’ve been into it?”

“Why—yes. I came to the door to speak to her.”

“After you’d found the body.”

“Yes.”

“And you said nothing?”

“Would it have been better if I had? I thought she would go into
hysterics—she’s French, you know, and easily upset—I wanted to think
over the best thing to do.”

Anthony nodded, but did not speak.

“You think it a pity, I can see?”

“Well, it was rather unfortunate, Mrs. Revel. If you and the maid had
discovered the body together, immediately on your return, it would have
simplified matters very much. The man would then definitely have been
shot _before_ your return to the house.”

“Whilst now they might say he was shot _after_—I see—”

He watched her taking in the idea, and was confirmed in his first
impression of her formed when she had spoken to him on the steps
outside. Besides beauty, she possessed courage and brains.

Virginia was so engrossed in the puzzle presented to her that it did
not occur to her to wonder at this strange man’s ready use of her name.

“Why didn’t Élise hear the shot, I wonder?” she murmured.

Anthony pointed to the open window, as a loud backfire came from a
passing car.

“There you are. London’s not the place to notice a pistol shot.”

Virginia turned with a little shudder to the body in the chair.

“He looks like an Italian,” she remarked curiously.

“He is an Italian,” said Anthony. “I should say that his regular
profession was that of a waiter. He only did blackmailing in his spare
time. His name might very possibly be Giuseppe.”

“Good heavens!” cried Virginia. “Is this Sherlock Holmes?”

“No,” said Anthony regretfully. “I’m afraid it’s just plain or garden
cheating. I’ll tell you all about it presently. Now you say this man
showed you some letters and asked you for money. Did you give him any?”

“Yes, I did.”

“How much?”

“Forty pounds.”

“That’s bad,” said Anthony, but without manifesting any undue surprise.
“Now let’s have a look at the telegram.”

Virginia picked it up from the table and gave it to him. She saw his
face grow grave as he looked at it.

“What’s the matter?”

He held it out, pointing silently to the place of origin.

“Barnes,” he said. “And you were at Ranelagh this afternoon. What’s to
prevent you having sent it off yourself?”

Virginia felt fascinated by his words. It was as though a net was
closing tighter and tighter round her. He was forcing her to see all
the things which she had felt dimly at the back of her mind.

Anthony took out his handkerchief and wound it round his hand, then he
picked up the pistol.

“We criminals have to be so careful,” he said apologetically.
“Fingerprints, you know.”

Suddenly she saw his whole figure stiffen. His voice, when he spoke,
had altered. It was terse and curt.

“Mrs. Revel,” he said, “have you ever seen this pistol before?”

“No,” said Virginia wonderingly.

“Are you sure of that?”

“Quite sure.”

“Have you a pistol of your own?”

“No.”

“Have you ever had one?”

“No, never.”

“You are sure of that?”

“Quite sure.”

He stared at her steadily for a minute, and Virginia stared back in
complete surprise at his tone.

Then, with a sigh, he relaxed.

“That’s odd,” he said. “How do you account for this?”

He held out the pistol. It was a small, dainty article, almost a
toy—though capable of doing deadly work. Engraved on it was the name
Virginia.

“Oh, it’s impossible!” cried Virginia.

Her astonishment was so genuine that Anthony could but believe in it.

“Sit down,” he said quietly. “There’s more in this than there seemed
to be first go off. To begin with, what’s our hypothesis? There are
only two possible ones. There is, of course, the real Virginia of the
letters. She may have somehow or other tracked him down, shot him,
dropped the pistol, stolen the letters, and taken herself off. That’s
quite possible, isn’t it?”

“I suppose so,” said Virginia unwillingly.

“The other hypothesis is a good deal more interesting. Whoever wished
to kill Giuseppe, wished also to incriminate you—in fact that may have
been their main object. They could get _him_ easily enough anywhere,
but they took extraordinary pains and trouble to get him _here_, and
whoever they were they knew all about you, your cottage at Datchet,
your usual household arrangements, and the fact that you were at
Ranelagh this afternoon. It seems an absurd question, but have you any
enemies, Mrs. Revel?”

“Of course I haven’t—not that kind, anyway.”

“The question is,” said Anthony, “what are we going to do now? There
are two courses open to us. A: Ring up the police, tell the whole
story, and trust to your unassailable position in the world and
your hitherto blameless life. B: An attempt on my part to dispose
successfully of the body. Naturally my private inclinations urge me
to B. I’ve always wanted to see if I couldn’t conceal a crime with
the necessary cunning, but have had a squeamish objection to shedding
blood. On the whole, I expect A’s the soundest. Then there’s a sort of
bowdlerized A. Ring up the police, etc., but suppress the pistol and
the blackmailing letters—that is, if they are on him still.”

Anthony ran rapidly through the dead man’s pockets.

“He’s been stripped clean,” he announced. “There’s not a thing on him.
There’ll be dirty work at the crossroads over those letters yet. Hullo,
what’s this? Hole in the lining—something got caught there, torn
roughly out, and a scrap of paper left behind.”

He drew out the scrap of paper as he spoke, and brought it over to the
light. Virginia joined him.

“Pity we haven’t got the rest of it,” he muttered. “_Chimneys 11.45
Thursday_—Sounds like an appointment.”

“Chimneys?” cried Virginia. “How extraordinary!”

“Why extraordinary? Rather high toned for such a low fellow?”

“I’m going to Chimneys this evening. At least I was.”

Anthony wheeled round on her.

“What’s that? Say that again.”

“I was going to Chimneys this evening,” repeated Virginia.

Anthony stared at her.

“I begin to see. At least, I may be wrong—but it’s an idea. Suppose
some one wanted badly to prevent your going to Chimneys?”

“My cousin George Lomax does,” said Virginia with a smile. “But I can’t
seriously suspect George of murder.”

Anthony did not smile. He was lost in thought.

“If you ring up the police, it’s good-bye to any idea of getting to
Chimneys to-day—or even to-morrow. And I should like you to go to
Chimneys. I fancy it will disconcert our unknown friends. Mrs. Revel,
will you put yourself in my hands?”

“It’s to be Plan B, then?”

“It’s to be Plan B. The first thing is to get that maid of yours out of
the house. Can you manage that?”

“Easily.”

Virginia went out in the hall and called up the stairs.

“Élise. Élise.”

“Madame?”

Anthony heard a rapid colloquy, and then the front door opened and
shut. Virginia came back into the room.

“She’s gone. I sent her for some special scent—told her the shop in
question was open until eight. It won’t be, of course. She’s to follow
after me by the next train without coming back here.”

“Good,” said Anthony approvingly. “We can now proceed to the disposal
of the body. It’s a time-worn method, but I’m afraid I shall have to
ask you if there’s such a thing in the house as a trunk?”

“Of course there is. Come down to the basement and take your choice.”

There was a variety of trunks in the basement. Anthony selected a solid
affair of suitable size.

“I’ll attend to this part of it,” he said tactfully. “You go upstairs
and get ready to start.”

Virginia obeyed. She slipped out of her tennis kit, put on a soft brown
travelling dress and a delightful little orange hat, and came down to
find Anthony waiting in the hall with a neatly strapped trunk beside
him.

“I should like to tell you the story of my life,” he remarked, “but
it’s going to be rather a busy evening. Now this is what you’ve got
to do. Call a taxi, have your luggage put on it, including the trunk.
Drive to Paddington. There have the trunk put in the Left Luggage
Office. I shall be on the platform. As you pass me, drop the Cloak
Room ticket. I will pick it up and pretend to return it to you, but in
reality I shall keep it. Go on to Chimneys, and leave the rest to me.”

“It’s awfully good of you,” said Virginia. “It’s really dreadful of me
saddling a perfect stranger with a dead body like this.”

“I like it,” returned Anthony nonchalantly. “If one of my friends,
Jimmy McGrath, were here, he’d tell you that anything of this kind
suits me down to the ground.”

Virginia was staring at him.

“What name did you say? Jimmy McGrath?”

Anthony returned her glance keenly.

“Yes. Why? Have you heard of him?”

“Yes—and quite lately.” She paused irresolutely, and then went on.
“Mr. Cade, I must talk to you. Can’t you come down to Chimneys?”

“You’ll see me before very long, Mrs. Revel—I’ll tell you that. Now,
exit Conspirator A by back door slinkingly. Exit Conspirator B in
blaze of glory by front door to taxi.”

The plan went through without a hitch. Anthony, having picked up a
second taxi, was on the platform and duly retrieved the fallen ticket.
He then departed in search of a somewhat battered second-hand Morris
Cowley which he had acquired earlier in the day in case it should be
necessary to his plans.

Returning to Paddington in this, he handed the ticket to the porter,
who got the trunk out of the cloak room and wedged it securely at the
back of the car. Anthony drove off.

His objective now was out of London. Through Notting Hill, Shepherd’s
Bush, down Goldhawk Road, through Brentford and Hounslow till he came
to the long stretch of road mid-way between Hounslow and Staines.
It was a well-frequented road, with motors passing continually. No
footmarks or tyre marks were likely to show. Anthony stopped the car at
a certain spot. Getting down, he first obscured the number-plate with
mud. Then, waiting until he heard no car coming in either direction,
he opened the trunk, heaved out Giuseppe’s body, and laid it neatly
down by the side of the road, on the inside of a curve, so that the
headlights of passing motors would not strike on it.

Then he entered the car again and drove away. The whole business had
occupied exactly one minute and a half. He made a détour to the right,
returning to London by way of Burnham Beeches. There again he halted
the car, and choosing a giant of the forest he deliberately climbed the
huge tree. It was something of a feat, even for Anthony. To one of the
topmost branches, he affixed a small brown-paper parcel, concealing it
in a little niche close to the bole.

“A very clever way of disposing of the pistol,” said Anthony to himself
with some approval. “Everybody hunts about on the ground, and drags
ponds. But there are very few people in England who could climb that
tree.”

Next, back to London and Paddington Station. Here he left the trunk—at
the other cloak room this time, the one on the Arrival side. He thought
longingly of such things as good rumpsteaks, juicy chops, and large
masses of fried potatoes. But he shook his head ruefully, glancing at
his wrist watch. He fed the Morris with a fresh supply of petrol, and
then took the road once more. North this time.

It was just after half-past eleven that he brought the car to rest in
the road adjoining the park of Chimneys. Jumping out he scaled the wall
easily enough, and set out towards the house. It took him longer than
he thought, and presently he broke into a run. A great grey mass loomed
up out of the darkness—the venerable pile of Chimneys. In the distance
a stable clock chimed the three quarters.

11.45—the time mentioned on the scrap of paper. Anthony was on the
terrace now, looking up at the house. Everything seemed dark and quiet.

“They go to bed early, these politicians,” he murmured to himself.

And suddenly a sound smote upon his ears—the sound of a shot. Anthony
spun round quickly. The sound had come from within the house—he was
sure of that. He waited a minute, but everything was still as death.
Finally he went up to one of the long French windows from where he
judged the sound that had startled him had come. He tried the handle.
It was locked. He tried some of the other windows, listening intently
all the while. But the silence remained unbroken.

In the end he told himself that he must have imagined the sound, or
perhaps mistaken a stray shot coming from a poacher in the woods. He
turned and retraced his steps across the park, vaguely dissatisfied and
uneasy.

He looked back at the house, and whilst he looked a light sprang up in
one of the windows on the first floor. In another minute it went out
again, and the whole place was in darkness once more.




10

Chimneys


Inspector Badgworthy in his office. Time, 8.30 A.M. A tall portly
man, Inspector Badgworthy, with a heavy regulation tread. Inclined to
breathe hard in moments of professional strain. In attendance Constable
Johnson, very new to the Force, with a downy unfledged look about him,
like a human chicken.

The telephone on the table rang sharply, and the inspector took it up
with his usual portentous gravity of action.

“Yes. Police station Market Basing. Inspector Badgworthy speaking.
What?”

Slight alteration in the inspector’s manner. As he is greater than
Johnson, so others are greater than Inspector Badgworthy.

“Speaking, my lord. I beg your pardon, my lord? I didn’t quite hear
what you said?”

Long pause, during which the inspector listens, quite a variety of
expressions passing over his usually impassive countenance. Finally he
lays down the receiver, after a brief “At once, my lord.”

He turned to Johnson, seeming visibly swelled with importance.

“From his lordship—at Chimneys—Murder.”

“Murder,” echoed Johnson, suitably impressed.

“Murder it is,” said the inspector, with great satisfaction.

“Why, there’s never been a murder here—not that I’ve ever heard
of—except the time that Tom Pearse shot his sweetheart.”

“And that, in a manner of speaking, wasn’t murder at all, but drink,”
said the inspector, deprecatingly.

“He weren’t hanged for it,” agreed Johnson gloomily. “But this is the
real thing, is it, sir?”

“It is, Johnson. One of his lordship’s guests, a foreign gentleman,
discovered shot. Open window, and footprints outside.”

“I’m sorry it were a foreigner,” said Johnson, with some regret.

It made the murder seem less real. Foreigners, Johnson felt, were
liable to be shot.

“His lordship’s in a rare taking,” continued the inspector. “We’ll get
hold of Dr. Cartwright and take him up with us right away. I hope to
goodness no one will get messing with those footprints.”

Badgworthy was in a seventh heaven. A murder! At Chimneys! Inspector
Badgworthy in charge of the case. The police have a clue. Sensational
arrest. Promotion and kudos for the aforementioned inspector.

“That is,” said Inspector Badgworthy to himself, “if Scotland Yard
doesn’t come butting in.”

The thought damped him momentarily. It seemed so extremely likely to
happen under the circumstances.

They stopped at Dr. Cartwright’s, and the doctor, who was a
comparatively young man, displayed a keen interest. His attitude was
almost exactly that of Johnson.

“Why, bless my soul,” he exclaimed. “We haven’t had a murder here since
the time of Tom Pearse.”

All three of them got into the doctor’s little car, and started
off briskly for Chimneys. As they passed the local inn, _The Jolly
Cricketers_, the doctor noticed a man standing in the doorway.

“Stranger,” he remarked. “Rather a nice-looking fellow. Wonder how long
he’s been here, and what he’s doing staying at the _Cricketers_? I
haven’t seen him about at all. He must have arrived last night.”

“He didn’t come by train,” said Johnson.

Johnson’s brother was the local railway porter, and Johnson was
therefore always well up in arrivals and departures.

“Who was there for Chimneys yesterday?” asked the inspector.

“Lady Eileen, she come down by the 3.40, and two gentlemen with her,
an American gent, and a young Army chap—neither of them with valets.
His lordship come down with a foreign gentleman, the one that’s been
shot as likely as not, by the 5.40, and the foreign gentleman’s valet.
Mr. Eversleigh come by the same train. Mrs. Revel came by the 7.25, and
another foreign-looking gentleman came by it too, one with a bald head
and a hook nose. Mrs. Revel’s maid came by the 8.56.”

Johnson paused, out of breath.

“And there was no one for the _Cricketers_?”

Johnson shook his head.

“He must have come by car then,” said the inspector. “Johnson, make
a note to institute inquiries at the _Cricketers_ on your way back.
We want to know all about any strangers. He was very sunburnt, that
gentleman. Likely as not, he’s come from foreign parts too.”

The inspector nodded his head with great sagacity, as though to imply
that that was the sort of wide-awake man he was—not to be caught
napping under any consideration.

The car passed in through the Park gates of Chimneys. Descriptions of
that historic place can be found in any guide book. It is also No. 3
in _Historic Homes of England_, price 21s. On Thursdays, chars-à-bancs
come over from Middlingham and view those portions of it which are open
to the public. In view of all these facilities, to describe Chimneys
would be superfluous.

They were received at the door by a white-headed butler whose demeanour
was perfect.

“We are not accustomed,” it seemed to say, “to having murder committed
within these walls. But these are evil days. Let us meet disaster with
perfect calm, and pretend with our dying breath that nothing out of the
usual has occurred.”

“His lordship,” said the butler, “is expecting you. This way, if you
please.”

He led them to a small cosy room which was Lord Caterham’s refuge from
the magnificence elsewhere, and announced them.

“The police, my lord, and Dr. Cartwright.”

Lord Caterham was pacing up and down in a visibly agitated state.

“Ha! inspector, you’ve turned up at last. I’m thankful for that. How
are you, Cartwright? This is the very devil of a business, you know.
The very devil of a business.”

And Lord Caterham, running his hands through his hair in a frenzied
fashion until it stood upright in little tufts, looked even less like a
peer of the realm than usual.

“Where’s the body?” asked the doctor, in curt business-like fashion.

Lord Caterham turned to him as though relieved at being asked a direct
question.

“In the council chamber—just where it was found—I wouldn’t have it
touched. I believed—er—that that was the correct thing to do.”

“Quite right, my lord,” said the inspector approvingly.

He produced a notebook and pencil.

“And who discovered the body? Did you?”

“Good Lord, no,” said Lord Caterham. “You don’t think I usually get up
at this unearthly hour in the morning, do you? No, a housemaid found
it. She screamed a good deal, I believe. I didn’t hear her myself. Then
they came to me about it, and of course I got up and came down—and
there it was, you know.”

“You recognized the body as that of one of your guests?”

“That’s right, inspector.”

“By name?”

This perfectly simple question seemed to upset Lord Caterham. He
opened his mouth once or twice, and then shut it again. Finally he
asked feebly.

“Do you mean—do you mean—what was his name?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“Well,” said Lord Caterham, looking slowly round the room, as though
hoping to gain inspiration. “His name was—I should say it was—yes,
decidedly so—Count Stanislaus.”

There was something so odd about Lord Caterham’s manner, that the
inspector ceased using his pencil and stared at him instead. But at
that moment a diversion occurred which seemed highly welcome to the
embarrassed peer.

The door opened and a girl came into the room. She was tall, slim and
dark, with an attractive boyish face, and a very determined manner.
This was Lady Eileen Brent, commonly known as Bundle, Lord Caterham’s
eldest daughter. She nodded to the others, and addressed her father
directly.

“I’ve got him,” she announced.

For a moment the inspector was on the point of starting forward
under the impression that the young lady had captured the murderer
red-handed, but almost immediately he realized that her meaning was
quite different.

Lord Caterham uttered a sigh of relief.

“That’s a good job. What did he say?”

“He’s coming over at once. We are to ‘use the utmost discretion.’”

Her father made a sound of annoyance.

“That’s just the sort of idiotic thing George Lomax would say. However,
once he comes, I shall wash my hands of the whole affair.”

He appeared to cheer up a little at the prospect.

“And the name of the murdered man was Count Stanislaus?” queried the
doctor.

A lightning glance passed between father and daughter, and then the
former said with some dignity:

“Certainly. I said so just now.”

“I asked because you didn’t seem quite sure about it before,” explained
Cartwright.

There was a faint twinkle in his eye, and Lord Caterham looked at him
reproachfully.

“I’ll take you to the Council Chamber,” he said more briskly.

They followed him, the inspector bringing up the rear, and darting
sharp glances all around him as he went, much as though he expected to
find a clue in a picture frame, or behind a door.

Lord Caterham took a key from his pocket and unlocked a door, flinging
it open. They all passed into a big room panelled in oak, with three
long windows giving on the terrace. There was a long refectory table
and a good many oak chests, and some beautiful old chairs. On the walls
were various paintings of dead and gone Caterhams and others.

Near the left-hand wall, about half-way between the door and the
window, a man was lying on his back, his arms flung wide.

Dr. Cartwright went over and knelt down by the body. The inspector
strode across to the windows, and examined them in turn. The centre
one was closed, but not fastened. On the steps outside were footprints
leading up to the window, and a second set going away again.

“Clear enough,” said the inspector, with a nod. “But there ought to be
footprints on the inside as well. They’d show up plain on this parquet
floor.”

“I think I can explain that,” interposed Bundle. “The housemaid had
polished half the floor this morning before she saw the body. You
see, it was dark when she came in here. She went straight across to
the windows, drew the curtains, and began on the floor, and naturally
didn’t see the body which is hidden from that side of the room by the
table. She didn’t see it until she came right on top of it.”

The inspector nodded.

“Well,” said Lord Caterham, eager to escape. “I’ll leave you here,
inspector. You’ll be able to find me if you—er—want me. But Mr.
George Lomax is coming over from Wyverne Abbey shortly, and he’ll be
able to tell you far more than I could. It’s his business really. I
can’t explain, but he will when he comes.”

Lord Caterham beat a precipitate retreat without waiting for a reply.

“Too bad for Lomax,” he complained. “Letting me in for this. What’s the
matter, Tredwell?”

The white-haired butler was hovering deferentially at his elbow.

“I have taken the liberty, my lord, of advancing the breakfast hour as
far as you are concerned. Everything is ready in the dining-room.”

“I don’t suppose for a minute I can eat anything,” said Lord Caterham
gloomily, turning his footsteps in that direction. “Not for a moment.”

Bundle slipped her hand through his arm, and they entered the
dining-room together. On the sideboard were half a score of heavy
silver dishes, ingeniously kept hot by patent arrangements.

“Omelet,” said Lord Caterham, lifting each lid in turn. “Eggs and
bacon, kidneys, devilled bird, haddock, cold ham, cold pheasant. I
don’t like any of these things, Tredwell, ask the cook to poach me an
egg, will you?”

“Very good, my lord.”

Tredwell withdrew. Lord Caterham, in an absent-minded fashion, helped
himself plentifully to kidneys and bacon, poured himself out a cup of
coffee, and sat down at the long table. Bundle was already busy with a
plateful of eggs and bacon.

“I’m damned hungry,” said Bundle with her mouth full. “It must be the
excitement.”

“It’s all very well for you,” complained her father. “You young people
like excitement. But I’m in a very delicate state of health. Avoid all
worry, that’s what Sir Abner Willis said—avoid all worry. So easy for
a man sitting in his consulting-room in Harley Street to say that. How
can I avoid worry when that ass Lomax lands me with a thing like this?
I ought to have been firm at the time. I ought to have put my foot
down.”

With a sad shake of the head, Lord Caterham rose and carved himself a
plate of ham.

“Codders has certainly done it this time,” observed Bundle cheerfully.
“He was almost incoherent over the telephone. He’ll be here in a minute
or two, spluttering nineteen to the dozen about discretion and hushing
it up.”

Lord Caterham groaned at the prospect.

“Was he up?” he asked.

“He told me,” replied Bundle, “that he had been up and dictating
letters and memoranda ever since seven o’clock.”

“Proud of it, too,” remarked her father. “Extraordinarily selfish,
these public men. They make their wretched secretaries get up at the
most unearthly hours in order to dictate rubbish to them. If a law was
passed compelling them to stop in bed until eleven, what a benefit it
would be to the nation! I wouldn’t mind so much if they didn’t talk
such balderdash. Lomax is always talking to me of my ‘position.’ As if
I had any. Who wants to be a peer nowadays?”

“Nobody,” said Bundle. “They’d much rather keep a prosperous public
house.”

Tredwell reappeared silently with two poached eggs in a little silver
dish which he placed on the table in front of Lord Caterham.

“What’s that, Tredwell?” said the latter, looking at them with faint
distaste.

“Poached eggs, my lord.”

“I hate poached eggs,” said Lord Caterham peevishly. “They’re so
insipid. I don’t like to look at them even. Take them away, will you,
Tredwell?”

“Very good, my lord.”

Tredwell and the poached eggs withdrew as silently as they came.

“Thank God no one gets up early in this house,” remarked Lord Caterham
devoutly. “We shall have to break this to them when they do, I suppose.”

He sighed.

“I wonder who murdered him,” said Bundle. “And why?”

“That’s not our business, thank goodness,” said Lord Caterham. “That’s
for the police to find out. Not that Badgworthy will ever find out
anything. On the whole I rather hope it was Nosystein.”

“Meaning——”

“The All British Syndicate.”

“Why should Mr. Isaacstein murder him when he’d come down here on
purpose to meet him?”

“High finance,” said Lord Caterham vaguely. “And that reminds me, I
shouldn’t be at all surprised if Isaacstein wasn’t an early riser. He
may blow in upon us at any minute. It’s a habit in the city. I believe
that, however rich you are, you always catch the 9.17.”

The sound of a motor being driven at great speed was heard through the
open window.

“Codders,” cried Bundle.

Father and daughter leaned out of the window and hailed the occupant of
the car as it drew up before the entrance.

“In here, my dear fellow, in here,” cried Lord Caterham, hastily
swallowing his mouthful of ham.

George had no intention of climbing in through the window. He
disappeared through the front door, and reappeared ushered in by
Tredwell, who withdrew at once.

“Have some breakfast,” said Lord Caterham, shaking him by the hand.
“What about a kidney?”

George waved the kidney aside impatiently.

“This is a terrible calamity, terrible, terrible.”

“It is indeed. Some haddock?”

“No, no. It must be hushed up—at all costs it must be hushed up.”

As Bundle had prophesied, George began to splutter.

“I understand your feelings,” said Lord Caterham sympathetically. “Try
an egg and bacon, or some haddock.”

“A totally unforeseen contingency—national calamity—concessions
jeopardized——”

“Take time,” said Lord Caterham. “And take some food. What you need
is some food, to pull you together. Poached eggs now? There were some
poached eggs here a minute or two ago.”

“I don’t want any food,” said George. “I’ve had breakfast, and even if
I hadn’t had any I shouldn’t want it. We must think what is to be done.
You have told no one as yet?”

“Well, there’s Bundle and myself. And the local police. And Cartwright.
And all the servants of course.”

George groaned.

“Pull yourself together, my dear fellow,” said Lord Caterham kindly.
“(I wish you’d have some breakfast.) You don’t seem to realize that
you can’t hush up a dead body. It’s got be buried and all that sort of
thing. Very unfortunate, but there it is.”

George became suddenly calm.

“You are right, Caterham. You have called in the local police, you say?
That will not do. We must have Battle.”

“Battle, murder and sudden death,” inquired Lord Caterham, with a
puzzled face.

“No, no, you misunderstand me. I referred to Superintendent Battle of
Scotland Yard. A man of the utmost discretion. He worked with us in
that deplorable business of the Party Funds.”

“What was that?” asked Lord Caterham, with some interest.

But George’s eye had fallen upon Bundle, as she sat half in and half
out of the window, and he remembered discretion just in time. He rose.

“We must waste no time. I must send off some wires at once.”

“If you write them out, Bundle will send them through the telephone.”

George pulled out a fountain pen and began to write with incredible
rapidity. He handed the first one to Bundle, who read it with a great
deal of interest.

“God! what a name,” she remarked. “Baron How Much?”

“Baron Lolopretjzyl.”

Bundle blinked.

“I’ve got it, but it will take some conveying to the post office.”

George continued to write. Then he handed his labours to Bundle and
addressed the master of the house:

“The best thing that you can do, Caterham——”

“Yes,” said Lord Caterham apprehensively.

“Is to leave everything in my hands.”

“Certainly,” said Lord Caterham, with alacrity. “Just what I was
thinking myself. You’ll find the police and Dr. Cartwright in the
Council Chamber. With the—er—with the body, you know. My dear Lomax,
I place Chimneys unreservedly at your disposal. Do anything you like.”

“Thank you,” said George. “If I should want to consult you——”

But Lord Caterham had faded unobtrusively through the farther door.
Bundle had observed his retreat with a grim smile.

“I’ll send off those telegrams at once,” she said. “You know your way
to the Council Chamber?”

“Thank you, Lady Eileen.”

George hurried from the room.




11

Superintendent Battle Arrives


So apprehensive was Lord Caterham of being consulted by George that he
spent the whole morning making a tour of his estate. Only the pangs of
hunger drew him homeward. He also reflected that by now the worst would
surely be over.

He sneaked into the house quietly by a small side door. From there he
slipped neatly into his sanctum. He flattered himself that his entrance
had not been observed, but there he was mistaken. The watchful Tredwell
let nothing escape him. He presented himself at the door.

“You’ll excuse me, my lord——”

“What is it, Tredwell?”

“Mr. Lomax, my lord, is anxious to see you in the library as soon as
you return.”

By this delicate method Tredwell conveyed that Lord Caterham had not
yet returned unless he chose to say so.

Lord Caterham sighed, and then rose.

“I suppose it will have to be done sooner or later. In the library, you
say?”

“Yes, my lord.”

Sighing again, Lord Caterham crossed the wide spaces of his ancestral
home, and reached the library door. The door was locked. As he rattled
the handle, it was unlocked from inside, opened a little way, and the
face of George Lomax appeared, peering out suspiciously.

His face changed when he saw who it was.

“Ah, Caterham, come in. We were just wondering what had become of you.”

Murmuring something vague about duties on the estate, repairs for
tenants, Lord Caterham sidled in apologetically. There were two other
men in the room. One was Colonel Melrose, the Chief Constable. The
other was a squarely built middle-aged man with a face so singularly
devoid of expression as to be quite remarkable.

“Superintendent Battle arrived half an hour ago,” explained George. “He
has been round with Inspector Badgworthy, and seen Dr. Cartwright. He
now wants a few facts from us.”

They all sat down, after Lord Caterham had greeted Melrose and
acknowledged his introduction to Superintendent Battle.

“I need hardly tell you, Battle,” said George, “that this is a case in
which we must use the utmost discretion.”

The superintendent nodded in an offhand manner that rather took Lord
Caterham’s fancy.

“That will be all right, Mr. Lomax. But no concealments from us. I
understand that the dead gentleman was called Count Stanislaus—at
least, that that is the name by which the household knew him. Now was
that his real name?”

“It was not.”

“What was his real name?”

“Prince Michael of Herzoslovakia.”

Battle’s eyes opened just a trifle, otherwise he gave no sign.

“And what, if I may ask the question, was the purpose of his visit
here? Just pleasure?”

“There was a further object, Battle. All this in the strictest
confidence of course.”

“Yes, yes, Mr. Lomax.”

“Colonel Melrose?”

“Of course.”

“Well, then, Prince Michael was here for the express purpose of meeting
Mr. Herman Isaacstein. A loan was to be arranged on certain terms.”

“Which were?”

“I do not know the exact details. Indeed, they had not yet been
arranged. But in the event of coming to the throne, Prince Michael
pledged himself to grant certain oil concessions to those companies in
which Mr. Isaacstein is interested. The British Government was prepared
to support the claim of Prince Michael to the throne in view of his
pronounced British sympathies.”

“Well,” said Superintendent Battle, “I don’t suppose I need go further
into it than that. Prince Michael wanted the money, Mr. Isaacstein
wanted oil, and the British Government was ready to do the heavy
father. Just one question. Was anyone else after those concessions?”

“I believe an American group of financiers had made overtures to His
Highness.”

“And been turned down, eh?”

But George refused to be drawn.

“Prince Michael’s sympathies were entirely pro-British,” he repeated.

Superintendent Battle did not press the point.

“Lord Caterham, I understand that this is what occurred yesterday. You
met Prince Michael in town and journeyed down here in company with him.
The Prince was accompanied by his valet, a Herzoslovakian named Boris
Anchoukoff, but his equerry, Captain Andrassy, remained in town. The
Prince, on arriving, declared himself greatly fatigued, and retired to
the apartments set aside for him. Dinner was served to him there, and
he did not meet the other members of the house party. Is that correct?”

“Quite correct.”

“This morning a housemaid discovered the body at approximately 7.45
A.M. Dr. Cartwright examined the dead man and found that death was the
result of a bullet fired from a revolver. No revolver was found, and no
one in the house seems to have heard the shot. On the other hand the
dead man’s wrist watch was smashed by the fall, and marks the crime as
having been committed at exactly a quarter to twelve. Now what time
did you retire to bed last night?”

“We went early. Somehow or other the party didn’t seem to ‘go’ if you
know what I mean, superintendent. We went up about half-past ten, I
should say.”

“Thank you. Now I will ask you, Lord Caterham, to give me a description
of all the people staying in the house.”

“But, excuse me, I thought the fellow who did it came from outside?”

Superintendent Battle smiled.

“I dare say he did. I dare say he did. But all the same I’ve got to
know who was in the house. Matter of routine, you know.”

“Well, there was Prince Michael and his valet and Mr. Herman
Isaacstein. You know all about them. Then there was Mr. Eversleigh——”

“Who works in my department,” put in George condescendingly.

“And who was acquainted with the real reason of Prince Michael’s being
here?”

“No, I should not say that,” replied George weightily. “Doubtless
he realized that something was in the wind, but I did not think it
necessary to take him fully into my confidence.”

“I see. Will you go on, Lord Caterham?”

“Let me see, there was Mr. Hiram Fish.”

“Who is Mr. Hiram Fish?”

“Mr. Fish is an American. He brought over a letter of introduction from
Mr. Lucius Gott—you’ve heard of Lucius Gott?”

Superintendent Battle smiled acknowledgment. Who had not heard of
Lucius C. Gott, the multi-millionaire?

“He was specially anxious to see my first editions. Mr. Gott’s
collection is, of course, unequalled, but I’ve got several treasures
myself. This Mr. Fish was an enthusiast. Mr. Lomax had suggested that
I ask one or two extra people down here this week-end to make things
seem more natural, so I took the opportunity of asking Mr. Fish. That
finishes the men. As for the ladies, there is only Mrs. Revel—and I
expect she brought a maid or something like that. Then there was my
daughter, and of course the children and their nurses and governesses
and all the servants.”

Lord Caterham paused and took a breath.

“Thank you,” said the detective. “A mere matter of routine, but
necessary as such.”

“There is no doubt, I suppose,” asked George ponderously, “that the
murderer entered by the window?”

Battle paused for a minute before replying slowly.

“There were footsteps leading up to the window, and footsteps leading
away from it. A car stopped outside the park at 11.40 last night. At
twelve o’clock a young man arrived at the _Jolly Cricketers_ in a car,
and engaged a room. He put his boots outside to be cleaned—they were
very wet and muddy, as though he had been walking through the long
grass in the park.”

George leant forward eagerly.

“Could not the boots be compared with the footprints?”

“They were.”

“Well?”

“They exactly correspond.”

“That settles it,” cried George. “We have the murderer. The young
man—what is his name, by the way?”

“At the inn he gave the name of Anthony Cade.”

“This Anthony Cade must be pursued at once, and arrested.”

“You won’t need to pursue him,” said Superintendent Battle.

“Why?”

“Because he’s still there.”

“What?”

“Curious, isn’t it?”

Colonel Melrose eyed him keenly.

“What’s in your mind, Battle? Out with it.”

“I just say it’s curious, that’s all. Here’s a young man who ought to
cut and run, but he doesn’t cut and run. He stays here, and gives us
every facility for comparing footmarks.”

“What do you think, then?”

“I don’t know what to think. And that’s a very disturbing state of
mind.”

“Do you imagine——” began Colonel Melrose, but broke off as a discreet
knock came at the door.

George rose and went to it. Tredwell, inwardly suffering from having to
knock at doors in this low fashion, stood dignified upon the threshold,
and addressed his master.

“Excuse me, my lord, but a gentleman wishes to see you on urgent and
important business, connected, I understand, with this morning’s
tragedy.”

“What’s his name?” asked Battle suddenly.

“His name, sir, is Mr. Anthony Cade, but he said it wouldn’t convey
anything to anybody.”

It seemed to convey something to the four men present. They all sat up
in varying degrees of astonishment.

Lord Caterham began to chuckle.

“I’m really beginning to enjoy myself. Show him in, Tredwell. Show him
in at once.”




12

Anthony Tells His Story


“Mr. Anthony Cade,” announced Tredwell.

“Enter suspicious stranger from village inn,” said Anthony.

He made his way toward Lord Caterham with a kind of instinct rare in
strangers. At the same time he summed up the other three men in his
own mind thus: “1, Scotland Yard. 2, Local dignitary—probably chief
constable. 3, Harassed gentleman on the verge of apoplexy—possibly
connected with the Government.”

“I must apologize,” continued Anthony, still addressing Lord Caterham.
“For forcing my way in like this, I mean. But it was rumoured round the
_Jolly Dog_, or whatever the name of your local pub may be, that you
had had a murder up here, and as I thought I might be able to throw
some light upon it I came along.”

For a moment or two, no one spoke. Superintendent Battle because he was
a man of ripe experience who knew how infinitely better it was to let
every one else speak if they could be persuaded upon to do so, Colonel
Melrose because he was habitually taciturn, George because he was in
the habit of having notice given him of the question, Lord Caterham
because he had not the least idea of what to say. The silence of the
other three, however, and the fact that he had been directly addressed,
finally forced speech upon the last named.

“Er—quite so—quite so,” he said nervously. “Won’t—you—er—sit down?”

“Thank you,” said Anthony.

George cleared his throat portentously.

“Er—when you say you can throw light upon this matter, you mean——?”

“I mean,” said Anthony, “that I was trespassing upon Lord Caterham’s
property (for which I hope he will forgive me) last night at about
11.45, and that I actually heard the shot fired. I can at any rate fix
the time of the crime for you.”

He looked round at the three in turn, his eyes resting longest on
Superintendent Battle, the impassivity of whose face he seemed to
appreciate.

“But I hardly think that that’s news to you,” he added gently.

“Meaning by that, Mr. Cade?” asked Battle.

“Just this. I put on shoes when I got up this morning. Later, when I
asked for my boots, I couldn’t have them. Some nice young constable had
called round for them. So I naturally put two and two together, and
hurried up here to clear my character if possible.”

“A very sensible move,” said Battle non-committally.

Anthony’s eyes twinkled a little.

“I appreciate your reticence, inspector. It is inspector, isn’t it?”

Lord Caterham interposed. He was beginning to take a fancy to Anthony.

“Superintendent Battle of Scotland Yard. This is Colonel Melrose, our
Chief Constable, and Mr. Lomax.”

Anthony looked sharply at George.

“Mr. George Lomax?”

“Yes.”

“I think, Mr. Lomax,” said Anthony, “that I had the pleasure of
receiving a letter from you yesterday.”

George stared at him.

“I think not,” he said coldly.

But he wished that Miss Oscar were here. Miss Oscar wrote all his
letters for him, and remembered who they were to and what they were
about. A great man like George could not possibly remember all these
annoying details.

“I think, Mr. Cade,” he hinted, “that you were about to give us
some—er—explanation of what you were doing in the grounds last night
at 11.45?”

His tone said plainly: “And whatever it may be, we are not likely to
believe it.”

“Yes, Mr. Cade, what _were_ you doing?” said Lord Caterham, with lively
interest.

“Well,” said Anthony regretfully. “I’m afraid it’s rather a long story.”

He drew out his cigarette case.

“May I?”

Lord Caterham nodded, and Anthony lit a cigarette, and braced himself
for the ordeal.

He was aware, none better, of the peril in which he stood. In the short
space of twenty-four hours, he had become embroiled in two separate
crimes. His actions in connection with the first would not bear looking
into for a second. After deliberately disposing of one body, and so
defeating the aims of justice, he had arrived upon the scene of the
second crime at the exact moment when it was being committed. For a
young man looking for trouble, he could hardly have done better.

“South America,” thought Anthony to himself, “simply isn’t in it with
this!”

He had already decided upon his course of action. He was going to tell
the truth—with one trifling alteration, and one grave suppression.

“The story begins,” said Anthony, “about three weeks ago—in Bulawayo.
Mr. Lomax, of course, knows where that is—outpost of the Empire—‘What
do we know of England who only England know?’ all that sort of thing. I
was conversing with a friend of mine, a Mr. James McGrath—”

He brought out the name slowly, with a thoughtful eye on George. George
bounded in his seat and repressed an exclamation with difficulty.

“The upshot of our conversation was that I came to England to carry
out a little commission for Mr. McGrath, who was unable to go himself.
Since the passage was booked in his name, I travelled as James
McGrath. I don’t know what particular kind of offence that was—the
superintendent can tell me, I dare say, and run me in for so many
months’ hard if necessary.”

“We’ll get on with the story, if you please, sir,” said Battle, but his
eyes twinkled a little.

“On arrival in London I went to the Blitz Hotel, still as James
McGrath. My business in London was to deliver a certain manuscript to a
firm of publishers, but almost immediately I received deputations from
the representatives of two political parties of a foreign kingdom. The
methods of one were strictly constitutional, the methods of the other
were not. I dealt with them both accordingly. But my troubles were not
over. That night my room was broken into, and an attempt at burglary
was made by one of the waiters at the hotel.”

“That was not reported to the police, I think?” said Superintendent
Battle.

“You are right. It was not. Nothing was taken, you see. But I did
report the occurrence to the manager of the hotel, and he will confirm
my story, and tell you that the waiter in question decamped rather
abruptly in the middle of the night. The next day, the publishers
rang me up, and suggested that one of their representatives would
call upon me and receive the manuscript. I agreed to this, and the
arrangement was duly carried out on the following morning. Since I
have heard nothing further, I presume the manuscript reached them
safely. Yesterday, still as James McGrath, I received a letter from Mr.
Lomax——”

Anthony paused. He was by now beginning to enjoy himself. George
shifted uneasily.

“I remember,” he murmured. “Such a large correspondence. The name, of
course, being different, I could not be expected to know. And I may
say,” George’s voice rose a little, firm in the assurance of moral
stability, “that I consider this—this—masquerading as another man in
the highest degree improper. I have no doubt, no doubt whatever, that
you have incurred a severe legal penalty.”

“In this letter,” continued Anthony, unmoved, “Mr. Lomax made various
suggestions concerning the manuscript in my charge. He also extended an
invitation to me from Lord Caterham to join the house party here.”

“Delighted to see you, my dear fellow,” said that nobleman. “Better
late than never—eh?”

George frowned at him.

Superintendent Battle bent an unmoved eye upon Anthony.

“And is that your explanation of your presence here last night, sir?”
he asked.

“Certainly not,” said Anthony warmly. “When I am asked to stay at a
country-house, I don’t scale the wall late at night, tramp across the
park, and try the downstairs windows. I drive up to the front door,
ring the bell and wipe my feet on the mat. I will proceed. I replied to
Mr. Lomax’s letter, explaining that the manuscript had passed out of
my keeping, and therefore regretfully declining Lord Caterham’s kind
invitation. But after I had done so, I remembered something which had
up till then escaped my memory.” He paused. The moment had come for
skating over thin ice. “I must tell you that in my struggle with the
waiter Giuseppe, I had wrested from him a small bit of paper with some
words scribbled on it. They had conveyed nothing to me at the time, but
I still had them, and the mention of Chimneys recalled them to me. I
got the torn scrap out and looked at it. It was as I had thought. Here
is the piece of paper, gentlemen, you can see for yourselves. The words
on it are ‘_Chimneys 11.45 Thursday._’”

Battle examined the paper attentively.

“Of course,” continued Anthony, “the word Chimneys might have nothing
whatever to do with this house. On the other hand, it might. And
undoubtedly this Giuseppe was a thieving rascal. I made up my mind to
motor down here last night, satisfy myself that all was as it should
be, put up at the inn, and call upon Lord Caterham in the morning and
put him on his guard in case some mischief should be intended during
the week-end.”

“Quite so,” said Lord Caterham encouragingly. “Quite so.”

“I was late in getting here—had not allowed enough time. Consequently
I stopped the car, climbed over the wall and ran across the park. When
I arrived on the terrace, the whole house was dark and silent. I was
just turning away when I heard a shot. I fancied that it came from
inside the house, and I ran back, crossed the terrace, and tried the
windows. But they were fastened, and there was no sound of any kind
from inside the house. I waited a while, but the whole place was still
as the grave, so I made up my mind that I had made a mistake, and that
what I had heard was a stray poacher—quite a natural conclusion to
come to under the circumstances, I think.”

“Quite natural,” said Superintendent Battle expressionlessly.

“I went on to the inn, put up as I said—and heard the news
this morning. I realized, of course, that I was a suspicious
character—bound to be under the circumstances, and came up here to
tell my story, hoping it wasn’t going to be handcuffs for one.”

There was a pause. Colonel Melrose looked sideways at Superintendent
Battle.

“I think the story seems clear enough,” he remarked.

“Yes,” said Battle. “I don’t think we’ll be handing out any handcuffs
this morning.”

“Any questions, Battle?”

“There’s one thing I’d like to know. What was this manuscript?”

He looked across at George, and the latter replied with a trace of
unwillingness:

“The Memoirs of the late Count Stylptitch. You see——”

“You needn’t say anything more,” said Battle. “I see perfectly.”

He turned to Anthony.

“Do you know who it was that was shot, Mr. Cade?”

“At the _Jolly Dog_ it was understood to be a Count Stanislaus or some
such name.”

“Tell him,” said Battle laconically to George Lomax.

George was clearly reluctant, but he was forced to speak:

“The gentleman who was staying here incognito as Count Stanislaus was
His Highness Prince Michael of Herzoslovakia.”

Anthony whistled.

“That must be deuced awkward,” he remarked.

Superintendent Battle, who had been watching Anthony closely, gave a
short grunt as though satisfied of something, and rose abruptly to his
feet.

“There are one or two questions I’d like to ask Mr. Cade,” he
announced. “I’ll take him into the Council Chamber with me if I may.”

“Certainly, certainly,” said Lord Caterham. “Take him anywhere you
like.”

Anthony and the detective went out together.

The body had been removed from the scene of the tragedy. There was a
dark stain on the floor where it had lain, but otherwise there was
nothing to suggest that a tragedy had ever occurred. The sun poured in
through the three windows, flooding the room with light, and bringing
out the mellow tone of the old panelling. Anthony looked around him
with approval.

“Very nice,” he commented. “Nothing much to beat old England, is there?”

“Did it seem to you at first it was in this room the shot was fired?”
asked the superintendent, not replying to Anthony’s eulogium.

“Let me see.”

Anthony opened the window and went out on the terrace, looking up at
the house.

“Yes, that’s the room all right,” he said. “It’s built out, and
occupies all the corner. If the shot had been fired anywhere else, it
would have sounded from the _left_, but this was from behind me or to
the right if anything. That’s why I thought of poachers. It’s at the
extremity of the wing, you see.”

He stepped back across the threshold, and asked suddenly, as though the
idea had just struck him:

“But why do you ask? You know he was shot here, don’t you?”

“Ah!” said the superintendent. “We never know as much as we’d like to
know. But, yes, he was shot here all right. Now you said something
about trying the windows, didn’t you?”

“Yes. They were fastened from the inside.”

“How many of them did you try?”

“All three of them.”

“Sure of that, sir?”

“I’m in the habit of being sure. Why do you ask?”

“That’s a funny thing,” said the superintendent.

“What’s a funny thing?”

“When the crime was discovered this morning, the middle one was
open—not latched, that is to say.”

“Whew!” said Anthony, sinking down on the window seat, and taking
out his cigarette case. “That’s rather a blow. That opens up quite
a different aspect of the case. It leaves us two alternatives.
Either he was killed by some one in the house, and that some one
unlatched the window after I had gone to make it look like an outside
job—incidentally with me as Little Willie—or else, not to mince
matters, I’m lying. I dare say you incline to the second possibility,
but, upon my honour, you’re wrong.”

“Nobody’s going to leave this house until I’m through with them, I can
tell you that,” said Superintendent Battle grimly.

Anthony looked at him keenly.

“How long have you had the idea that it might be an inside job?” he
asked.

Battle smiled.

“I’ve had a notion that way all along. Your trail was a bit
too—flaring, if I may put it that way. As soon as your boots fitted
the footmarks, I began to have my doubts.”

“I congratulate Scotland Yard,” said Anthony lightly.

But at that moment, the moment when Battle apparently admitted
Anthony’s complete absence of complicity in the crime, Anthony felt
more than ever the need of being upon his guard. Superintendent Battle
was a very astute officer. It would not do to make any slip with
Superintendent Battle about.

“That’s where it happened, I suppose?” said Anthony, nodding towards
the dark patch upon the floor.

“Yes.”

“What was he shot with—a revolver?”

“Yes, but we shan’t know what make until they get the bullet out at the
autopsy.”

“It wasn’t found, then?”

“No, it wasn’t found.”

“No clues of any kind?”

“Well, we’ve got this.”

Rather after the manner of a conjurer, Superintendent Battle produced
a half-sheet of notepaper. And, as he did so, he again watched Anthony
closely without seeming to do so.

But Anthony recognized the design upon it without any sign of
consternation.

“Aha! Comrades of the Red Hand again. If they’re going to scatter this
sort of thing about, they ought to have it lithographed. It must be a
frightful nuisance doing every one separately. Where was this found?”

“Underneath the body. You’ve seen it before, sir?”

Anthony recounted to him in detail his short encounter with that
public-spirited association.

“The idea is, I suppose, that the Comrades did him in.”

“Do you think it likely, sir?”

“Well, it would be in keeping with their propaganda. But I’ve always
found that those who talk most about blood have never actually seen
it run. I shouldn’t have said the Comrades had the guts myself. And
they’re such picturesque people too. I don’t see one of them disguising
himself as a suitable guest for a country house. Still, one never
knows.”

“Quite right, Mr. Cade. One never knows.”

Anthony looked suddenly amused.

“I see the big idea now. Open window, trail of footprints, suspicious
stranger at village inn. But I can assure you, my dear superintendent,
that, whatever I am, I am not the local agent of the Red Hand.”

Superintendent Battle smiled a little. Then he played his last card.

“Would you have any objection to seeing the body?” he shot out suddenly.

“None whatever,” rejoined Anthony.

Battle took a key from his pocket, and preceding Anthony down the
corridor, paused at a door and unlocked it. It was one of the smaller
drawing-rooms. The body lay on a table covered with a sheet.

Superintendent Battle waited until Anthony was beside him, and then
whisked away the sheet suddenly.

An eager light sprang into his eyes at the half-uttered exclamation and
the start of surprise which the other gave.

“So you _do_ recognize him, Mr. Cade,” he said, in a voice that he
strove to render devoid of triumph.

“I’ve seen him before, yes,” said Anthony, recovering himself. “But
not as Prince Michael Obolovitch. He purported to come from Messrs.
Balderson and Hodgkins, and he called himself Mr. Holmes.”




13

The American Visitor


Superintendent Battle replaced the sheet with the slightly crest-fallen
air of a man whose best point has fallen flat. Anthony stood with his
hands in his pockets lost in thought.

“So that’s what old Lollipop meant when he talked about ‘other means,’”
he murmured at last.

“I beg your pardon, Mr. Cade?”

“Nothing, superintendent. Forgive my abstraction. You see, I—or rather
my friend, Jimmy McGrath, has been very neatly done out of a thousand
pounds.”

“A thousand pounds is a nice sum of money,” said Battle.

“It isn’t the thousand pounds so much,” said Anthony, “though I agree
with you that it’s a nice sum of money. It’s being done that maddens
me. I handed over that manuscript like a little woolly lamb. It hurts,
superintendent, indeed it hurts.”

The detective said nothing.

“Well, well,” said Anthony. “Regrets are vain, and all may not yet be
lost. I’ve only got to get hold of dear old Stylptitch’s Reminiscences
between now and next Wednesday and all will be gas and gaiters.”

“Would you mind coming back to the Council Chamber, Mr. Cade? There’s
one little thing I want to point out to you.”

Back in the Council Chamber, the detective strode over at once to the
middle window.

“I’ve been thinking, Mr. Cade. This particular window is very stiff,
very stiff indeed. You might have been mistaken in thinking that it was
fastened. It might just have stuck. I’m sure—yes, I’m almost sure,
that you _were_ mistaken.”

Anthony eyed him keenly.

“And supposing I say that I’m quite sure I was not?”

“Don’t you think you could have been?” said Battle, looking at him very
steadily.

“Well, to oblige you, superintendent, yes.”

Battle smiled in a satisfied fashion.

“You’re quick in the uptake, sir. And you’ll have no objection to
saying so, careless like, at a suitable moment?”

“None whatever. I——”

He paused, as Battle gripped his arm. The superintendent was bent
forward, listening.

Enjoining silence on Anthony with a gesture, he tiptoed noiselessly to
the door, and flung it suddenly open.

On the threshold stood a tall man with black hair neatly parted in the
middle, china blue eyes with a particularly innocent expression, and a
large placid face.

“Your pardon, gentlemen,” he said in a slow drawling voice with a
pronounced transatlantic accent. “But is it permitted to inspect the
scene of the crime? I take it that you are both gentlemen from Scotland
Yard?”

“I have not that honour,” said Anthony. “But this gentleman is
Superintendent Battle of Scotland Yard.”

“Is that so?” said the American gentleman, with a great appearance of
interest. “Pleased to meet you, sir. My name is Hiram P. Fish, of New
York City.”

“What was it you wanted to see, Mr. Fish?” asked the detective.

The American walked gently into the room, and looked with much interest
at the dark patch on the floor.

“I am interested in crime, Mr. Battle. It is one of my hobbies. I have
contributed a monograph to one of our weekly periodicals on the subject
‘Degeneracy and the Criminal.’”

As he spoke, his eyes went gently round the room, seeming to note
everything in it. They rested just a shade longer on the window.

“The body,” said Superintendent Battle, stating a self-evident fact,
“has been removed.”

“Surely,” said Mr. Fish. His eyes went on to the panelled walls.
“Some remarkable pictures in this room, gentlemen. A Holbein, two
Van Dycks, and, if I am not mistaken, a Velasquez. I am interested
in pictures—and likewise in first editions. It was to see his first
editions that Lord Caterham was so kind as to invite me down here.”

He sighed gently.

“I guess that’s all off now. It would show a proper feeling I suppose,
for the guests to return to town immediately?”

“I’m afraid that can’t be done, sir,” said Superintendent Battle.
“Nobody must leave the house until after the inquest.”

“Is that so? And when is the inquest?”

“May be to-morrow, may not be until Monday. We’ve got to arrange for
the autopsy and see the Coroner.”

“I get you,” said Mr. Fish. “Under the circumstances, though, it will
be a melancholy party.”

Battle led the way to the door.

“We’d best get out of here,” he said. “We’re keeping it locked still.”

He waited for the other two to pass through, and then turned the key
and removed it.

“I opine,” said Mr. Fish, “that you are seeking for fingerprints?”

“Maybe,” said the superintendent laconically.

“I should say to that, on a night such as last night, an intruder would
have left footprints on the hardwood floor.”

“None inside, plenty outside.”

“Mine,” explained Anthony cheerfully.

The innocent eyes of Mr. Fish swept over him.

“Young man,” he said, “you surprise me.”

They turned a corner, and came out into the big wide hall, panelled like
the Council Chamber in old oak, and with a wide gallery above it. Two
other figures came into sight at the far end.

“Aha!” said Mr. Fish. “Our genial host.”

This was such a ludicrous description of Lord Caterham that Anthony had
to turn his head away to conceal a smile.

“And with him,” continued the American, “is a lady whose name I did not
catch last night. But she is bright—she is very bright.”

With Lord Caterham was Virginia Revel.

Anthony had been anticipating this meeting all along. He had no
idea how to act. He must leave it to Virginia. Although he had full
confidence in her presence of mind, he had not the slightest idea what
line she would take. He was not long left in doubt.

“Why, it’s Mr. Cade,” said Virginia. She held out both hands to him.
“So you found you could come down after all?”

“My dear Mrs. Revel, I had no idea Mr. Cade was a friend of yours,”
said Lord Caterham.

“He’s a very old friend,” said Virginia, smiling at Anthony with a
mischievous glint in her eye. “I ran across him in London unexpectedly
yesterday, and told him I was coming down here.”

Anthony was quick to give her her pointer.

“I explained to Mrs. Revel,” he said, “that I had been forced to refuse
your kind invitation—since it had really been extended to quite a
different man. And I couldn’t very well foist a perfect stranger on you
under false pretences.”

“Well, well, my dear fellow,” said Lord Caterham, “that’s all over and
done with now. I’ll send down to the _Cricketers_ for your bag.”

“It’s very kind of you, Lord Caterham, but——”

“Nonsense, of course you must come to Chimneys. Horrible place, the
_Cricketers_—to stay in, I mean.”

“Of course you must come, Mr. Cade,” said Virginia softly.

Anthony realized the altered tone of his surroundings. Already Virginia
had done much for him. He was no longer an ambiguous stranger. Her
position was so assured and unassailable that anyone for whom she
vouched was accepted as a matter of course. He thought of the pistol in
the tree at Burnham Beeches, and smiled inwardly.

“I’ll send for your traps,” said Lord Caterham to Anthony. “I suppose,
in the circumstances, we can’t have any shooting. A pity. But there it
is. And I don’t know what the devil to do with Isaacstein. It’s all
very unfortunate.”

The depressed peer sighed heavily.

“That’s settled, then,” said Virginia. “You can begin to be useful
right away, Mr. Cade, and take me out on the lake. It’s very peaceful
there and far from crime and all that sort of thing. Isn’t it awful for
poor Lord Caterham having a murder done in his house? But it’s George’s
fault really. This is George’s party, you know.”

“Ah!” said Lord Caterham. “But I should never have listened to him!”

He assumed the air of a strong man betrayed by a single weakness.

“One can’t help listening to George,” said Virginia. “He always holds
you so that you can’t get away. I’m thinking of patenting a detachable
lapel.”

“I wish you would,” chuckled her host. “I’m glad you’re coming to us,
Cade. I need support.”

“I appreciate your kindness very much, Lord Caterham,” said Anthony.
“Especially,” he added, “when I’m such a suspicious character. But my
staying here makes it easier for Battle.”

“In what way, sir?” asked the superintendent.

“It won’t be so difficult to keep an eye on me,” explained Anthony
gently.

And by the momentary flicker of the superintendent’s eyelids he knew
that his shot had gone home.




14

Mainly Political and Financial


Except for that involuntary twitch of the eyelids, Superintendent
Battle’s impassivity was unimpaired. If he had been surprised at
Virginia’s recognition of Anthony, he did not show it. He and Lord
Caterham stood together and watched those two go out through the garden
door. Mr. Fish also watched them.

“Nice young fellow, that,” said Lord Caterham.

“Vurry nice for Mrs. Revel to meet an old friend,” murmured the
American. “They have been acquainted some time, presoomably?”

“Seems so,” said Lord Caterham. “But I’ve never heard her mention him
before. Oh, by the way, Battle, Mr. Lomax has been asking for you. He’s
in the Blue morning-room.”

“Very good, Lord Caterham. I’ll go there at once.”

Battle found his way to the Blue morning-room without difficulty. He
was already familiar with the geography of the house.

“Ah, there you are, Battle,” said Lomax.

He was striding impatiently up and down the carpet. There was one other
person in the room, a big man sitting in a chair by the fireplace. He
was dressed in very correct English shooting clothes which nevertheless
sat strangely upon him. He had a fat yellow face, and black eyes, as
impenetrable as those of a cobra. There was a generous curve to the big
nose and power in the square lines of the vast jaw.

“Come in, Battle,” said Lomax irritably. “And shut the door behind
you. This is Mr. Herman Isaacstein.”

Battle inclined his head respectfully.

He knew all about Mr. Herman Isaacstein, and though the great financier
sat there silent, whilst Lomax strode up and down and talked, he knew
who was the real power in the room.

“We can speak more freely now,” said Lomax. “Before Lord Caterham and
Colonel Melrose, I was anxious not to say too much. You understand,
Battle? These things mustn’t get about.”

“Ah!” said Battle. “But they always do, more’s the pity.”

Just for a second he saw a trace of a smile on the fat yellow face. It
disappeared as suddenly as it had come.

“Now what do you really think of this young fellow—this Anthony Cade?”
continued George. “Do you still assume him to be innocent?”

Battle shrugged his shoulders very slightly.

“He tells a straight story. Part of it we shall be able to verify.
On the face of it, it accounts for his presence here last night. I
shall cable to South Africa, of course, for information about his
antecedents.”

“Then you regard him as cleared of all complicity?”

Battle raised a large square hand.

“Not so fast, sir. I never said that.”

“What is your own idea about the crime, Superintendent Battle?” asked
Isaacstein, speaking for the first time.

His voice was deep and rich, and had a certain compelling quality about
it. It had stood him in good stead at board meetings in his younger
days.

“It’s rather too soon to have ideas, Mr. Isaacstein. I’ve not got
beyond asking myself the first question.”

“What is that?”

“Oh, it’s always the same. Motive. Who benefits by the death of Prince
Michael? We’ve got to answer that before we can get anywhere.”

“The Revolutionary party of Herzoslovakia——” began George.

Superintendent Battle waved him aside with something less than his
usual respect.

“It wasn’t the Comrades of the Red Hand, sir, if you’re thinking of
them.”

“But the paper—with the scarlet hand on it?”

“Put there to suggest the obvious solution.”

George’s dignity was a little ruffled.

“Really, Battle, I don’t see how you can be so sure of that.”

“Bless you, Mr. Lomax, we know all about the Comrades of the Red Hand.
We’ve had our eye on them ever since Prince Michael landed in England.
That sort of thing is the elementary work of the department. They’d
never be allowed to get within a mile of him.”

“I agree with Superintendent Battle,” said Isaacstein. “We must look
elsewhere.”

“You see, sir,” said Battle, encouraged by his support, “we do know a
little about the case. If we don’t know who gains by his death, we do
know who loses by it.”

“Meaning?” said Isaacstein.

His black eyes were bent upon the detective. More than ever, he
reminded Battle of a hooded cobra.

“You and Mr. Lomax, not to mention the Loyalist party of Herzoslovakia.
If you’ll pardon the expression, sir, you’re in the soup.”

“Really, Battle,” interposed George, shocked to the core.

“Go on, Battle,” said Isaacstein. “In the soup describes the situation
very accurately. You’re an intelligent man.”

“You’ve got to have a King. You’ve lost your King—like that!” He
snapped his large fingers. “You’ve got to find another in a hurry, and
that’s not an easy job. No, I don’t want to know the details of your
scheme, the bare outline is enough for me, but, I take it, it’s a big
deal?”

Isaacstein bent his head slowly.

“It’s a very big deal.”

“That brings me to my second question. Who is the next heir to the
throne of Herzoslovakia?”

Isaacstein looked across at Lomax. The latter answered the question,
with a certain reluctance, and a good deal of hesitation:

“That would be—I should say—yes, in all probability Prince Nicholas
would be the next heir.”

“Ah!” said Battle. “And who is Prince Nicholas?”

“A first cousin of Prince Michael’s.”

“Ah!” said Battle. “I should like to hear all about Prince Nicholas,
especially where he is at present.”

“Nothing much is known of him,” said Lomax. “As a young man, he was
most peculiar in his ideas, consorted with Socialists and Republicans,
and acted in a way highly unbecoming to his position. He was sent down
from Oxford, I believe, for some wild escapade. There was a rumour
of his death two years later in the Congo, but it was only a rumour.
He turned up a few months ago when news of the Royalist reaction got
about.”

“Indeed?” said Battle. “Where did he turn up?”

“In America.”

“America!”

Battle turned to Isaacstein with one laconic word:

“Oil?”

The financier nodded.

“He represented that if the Herzoslovakians chose a King, they would
prefer him to Prince Michael as being more in sympathy with modern
enlightened ideas, and he drew attention to his early democratic views
and his sympathy with Republican ideals. In return for financial
support, he was prepared to grant concessions to a certain group of
American financiers.”

Superintendent Battle so far forgot his habitual impassivity as to give
vent to a prolonged whistle.

“So that is it,” he muttered. “In the meantime, the Loyalist party
supported Prince Michael, and you felt sure you’d come out on top. And
then this happens!”

“You surely don’t think——” began George.

“It was a big deal,” said Battle. “Mr. Isaacstein says so. And I
should say that what he calls a big deal _is_ a big deal.”

“There are always unscrupulous tools to be got hold of,” said
Isaacstein quietly. “For the moment, Wall Street wins. But they’ve not
done with me yet. Find out who killed Prince Michael, Superintendent
Battle, if you want to do your country a service.”

“One thing strikes me as highly suspicious,” put in George. “Why did
the equerry, Captain Andrassy, not come down with the Prince yesterday?”

“I’ve inquired into that,” said Battle. “It’s perfectly simple. He
stayed in town to make arrangements with a certain lady, on behalf of
Prince Michael, for next week-end. The Baron rather frowned on such
things, thinking them injudicious at the present stage of affairs, so
His Highness had to go about them in a hole and corner manner. He was,
if I may say so, inclined to be a rather—er—dissipated young man.”

“I’m afraid so,” said George ponderously. “Yes, I’m afraid so.”

“There’s one other point we ought to take into account, I think,” said
Battle, speaking with a certain amount of hesitation. “King Victor’s
supposed to be in England.”

“King Victor?”

Lomax frowned in an effort at recollection.

“Notorious French crook, sir. We’ve had a warning from the Sûreté in
Paris.”

“Of course,” said George. “I remember now. Jewel thief, isn’t he? Why,
that’s the man——”

He broke off abruptly. Isaacstein, who had been frowning abstractedly
at the fireplace, looked up just too late to catch the warning glance
telegraphed from Superintendent Battle to the other. But being a man
sensitive to vibrations in the atmosphere, he was conscious of a sense
of strain.

“You don’t want me any longer, do you, Lomax?” he inquired.

“No, thank you, my dear fellow.”

“Would it upset your plans if I returned to London, Superintendent
Battle?”

“I’m afraid so, sir,” said the Superintendent civilly. “You see, if you
go, there will be others who’ll want to go also. And that would never
do.”

“Quite so.”

The great financier left the room, closing the door behind him.

“Splendid fellow, Isaacstein,” murmured George Lomax perfunctorily.

“Very powerful personality,” agreed Superintendent Battle.

George began to pace up and down again.

“What you say disturbs me greatly,” he began. “King Victor! I thought
he was in prison?”

“Came out a few months ago. French police meant to keep on his heels,
but he managed to give them the slip straight away. He would too. One
of the coolest customers that ever lived. For some reason or other,
they believe he’s in England, and have notified us to that effect.”

“But what should he be doing in England?”

“That’s for you to say, sir,” said Battle significantly.

“You mean——? You think——? You know the story, of course—ah, yes,
I can see you do. I was not in office, of course, at the time, but I
heard the whole story from the late Lord Caterham. An unparalleled
catastrophe.”

“The Koh-i-noor,” said Battle reflectively.

“Hush, Battle!” George glanced suspiciously round him. “I beg of you,
mention no names. Much better not. If you must speak of it, call it the
K.”

The superintendent looked wooden again.

“You don’t connect King Victor with this crime, do you, Battle?”

“It’s just a possibility, that’s all. If you’ll cast your mind back,
sir, you’ll remember that there were four places where a—er—certain
Royal visitor might have concealed the jewel. Chimneys was one of them.
King Victor was arrested in Paris three days after the—disappearance,
if I may call it that, of the K. It was always hoped that he would some
day lead us to the jewel.”

“But Chimneys has been ransacked and overhauled a dozen times.”

“Yes,” said Battle sapiently. “But it’s never much good looking when
you don’t know where to look. Only suppose now, that this King Victor
came here to look for the thing, was surprised by Prince Michael, and
shot him.”

“It’s possible,” said George. “A most likely solution of the crime.”

“I wouldn’t go as far as that. It’s possible, but not much more.”

“Why is that?”

“Because King Victor has never been known to take a life,” said Battle
seriously.

“Oh, but a man like that—a dangerous criminal——”

But Battle shook his head in a dissatisfied manner.

“Criminals always act true to type, Mr. Lomax. It’s surprising. All the
same——”

“Yes?”

“I’d rather like to question the Prince’s servant. I’ve left him
purposely to the last. We’ll have him in here, sir, if you don’t mind.”

George signified his assent. The superintendent rang the bell. Tredwell
answered it, and departed with his instructions.

He returned shortly accompanied by a tall fair man with high
cheek-bones, and very deep-set blue eyes, and an impassivity of
countenance which almost rivalled Battle’s.

“Boris Anchoukoff?”

“Yes.”

“You were valet to Prince Michael?”

“I was His Highness’s valet, yes.”

The man spoke good English, though with a markedly harsh foreign accent.

“You know that your master was murdered last night?”

A deep snarl, like the snarl of a wild beast, was the man’s only
answer. It alarmed George, who withdrew prudently towards the window.

“When did you see your master last?”

“His Highness retired to bed at half-past ten. I slept, as always,
in the ante-room next to him. He must have gone down to the room
downstairs by the other door, the door that gave on to the corridor.
I did not hear him go. It may be that I was drugged. I have been an
unfaithful servant, I slept while my master woke. I am accursed.”

George gazed at him, fascinated.

“You loved your master, eh?” said Battle, watching the man closely.

Boris’s features contracted painfully. He swallowed twice. Then his
voice came, harsh with emotion.

“I say this to you, English Policeman, I would have died for him! And
since he is dead, and I still live, my eyes shall not know sleep, or
my heart rest, until I have avenged him. Like a dog will I nose out
his murderer and when I have discovered him—— Ah!” His eyes lit up.
Suddenly he drew an immense knife from beneath his coat and brandished
it aloft. “Not all at once will I kill him—oh, no!—first I will slit
his nose, and cut off his ears and put out his eyes, and then—then,
into his black heart I will thrust this knife.”

Swiftly he replaced the knife, and turning, left the room. George
Lomax, his eyes always protuberant, but now goggling almost out of his
head, stared at the closed door.

“Pure bred Herzoslovakian, of course,” he muttered. “Most uncivilized
people. A race of brigands.”

Superintendent Battle rose alertly to his feet.

“Either that man’s sincere,” he remarked, “or he’s the best bluffer
I’ve ever seen. And, if it’s the former, God help Prince Michael’s
murderer when that human bloodhound gets hold of him.”




15

The French Stranger


Virginia and Anthony walked side by side down the path which led to the
lake. For some minutes after leaving the house they were silent. It was
Virginia who broke the silence at last with a little laugh.

“Oh, dear,” she said, “isn’t it dreadful? Here I am so bursting with
the things I want to tell you, and the things I want to know, that
I simply don’t know where to begin. First of all”—she lowered her
voice—“_What have you done with the body?_ How awful it sounds,
doesn’t it! I never dreamt that I should be so steeped in crime.”

“I suppose it’s quite a novel sensation for you,” agreed Anthony.

“But not for you?”

“Well, I’ve never disposed of a corpse before, certainly.”

“Tell me about it.”

Briefly and succinctly, Anthony ran over the steps he had taken on the
previous night. Virginia listened attentively.

“I think you were very clever,” she said approvingly when he had
finished. “I can pick up the trunk again when I go back to Paddington.
The only difficulty that might arise is if you had to give an account
of where you were yesterday evening.”

“I can’t see that that can arise. The body can’t have been found until
late last night—or possibly this morning. Otherwise there would have
been something about it in this morning’s papers. And whatever you may
imagine from reading detective stories, doctors aren’t such magicians
that they can tell you exactly how many hours a man has been dead. The
exact time of his death will be pretty vague. An alibi for last night
would be far more to the point.”

“I know. Lord Caterham was telling me all about it. But the Scotland
Yard man is quite convinced of your innocence now, isn’t he?”

Anthony did not reply at once.

“He doesn’t look particularly astute,” continued Virginia.

“I don’t know about that,” said Anthony slowly. “I’ve an impression
that there are no flies on Superintendent Battle. He appears to be
convinced of my innocence—but I’m not so sure. He’s stumped at present
by my apparent lack of motive.”

“Apparent?” cried Virginia. “But what possible reason could you have
for murdering an unknown foreign Count?”

Anthony darted a sharp glance at her.

“You were at one time or other in Herzoslovakia, weren’t you?” he asked.

“Yes. I was there with my husband, for two years, at the Embassy.”

“That was just before the assassination of the King and Queen. Did you
ever run across Prince Michael Obolovitch?”

“Michael? Of course I did. Horrid little wretch! He suggested, I
remember, that I should marry him morganatically.”

“Did he really? And what did he suggest you should do about your
existing husband?”

“Oh, he had a sort of David and Uriah scheme all made out.”

“And how did you respond to this amiable offer?”

“Well,” said Virginia, “unfortunately one had to be diplomatic. So poor
little Michael didn’t get it as straight from the shoulder as he might
have done. But he retired hurt all the same. Why all this interest
about Michael?”

“Something I’m getting at in my own blundering fashion. I take it that
you didn’t meet the murdered man?”

“No. To put it like a book, he ‘retired to his own apartments
immediately on arrival.’”

“And of course you haven’t seen the body?”

Virginia, eyeing him with a good deal of interest, shook her head.

“Could you get to see it, do you think?”

“By means of influence in high places—meaning Lord Caterham—I dare
say I could. Why? Is it an order?”

“Good Lord, no,” said Anthony, horrified. “Have I been as dictatorial
as all that? No, it’s simply this. Count Stanislaus was the incognito
of Prince Michael of Herzoslovakia.”

Virginia’s eyes opened very wide.

“I see.” Suddenly her face broke into its fascinating one-sided smile.
“I hope you don’t suggest that Michael went to his rooms simply to
avoid seeing me?”

“Something of the kind,” admitted Anthony. “You see, if I’m right in
my idea that some one wanted to prevent your coming to Chimneys, the
reason seems to lie in your knowing Herzoslovakia. Do you realize that
you’re the only person here who knew Prince Michael by sight?”

“Do you mean that this man who was murdered was an impostor?” asked
Virginia abruptly.

“That is the possibility that crossed my mind. If you can get Lord
Caterham to show you the body, we can clear up that point at once.”

“He was shot at 11.45,” said Virginia thoughtfully. “The time mentioned
on that scrap of paper. The whole thing’s horribly mysterious.”

“That reminds me. Is that your window up there? The second from the end
over the Council Chamber?”

“No, my room is in the Elizabethan wing, the other side. Why?”

“Simply because as I walked away last night, after thinking I heard a
shot, the light went up in that room.”

“How curious! I don’t know who has that room, but I can find out by
asking Bundle. Perhaps they heard the shot?”

“If so, they haven’t come forward to say so. I understood from Battle
that nobody in the house heard the shot fired. It’s the only clue of
any kind that I’ve got, and I dare say it’s a pretty rotten one, but I
mean to follow it up for what it’s worth.”

“It’s curious, certainly,” said Virginia thoughtfully.

They had arrived at the boat-house by the lake, and had been leaning
against it as they talked.

“And now for the whole story,” said Anthony. “We’ll paddle gently about
on the lake, secure from the prying ears of Scotland Yard, American
visitors, and curious house-maids.”

“I’ve heard something from Lord Caterham,” said Virginia. “But not
nearly enough. To begin with, which are you really, Anthony Cade or
Jimmy McGrath?”

For the second time that morning, Anthony unfolded the history of the
last six weeks of his life—with this difference that the account given
to Virginia needed no editing. He finished up with his own astonished
recognition of “Mr. Holmes.”

“By the way, Mrs. Revel,” he ended, “I’ve never thanked you for
imperilling your immortal soul by saying that I was an old friend of
yours.”

“Of course you’re an old friend,” cried Virginia. “You don’t suppose
I’d cumber you with a corpse, and then pretend you were a mere
acquaintance next time I met you? No, indeed!”

She paused.

“Do you know one thing that strikes me about all this?” she went on.
“That there’s some extra mystery about those Memoirs that we haven’t
fathomed yet.”

“I think you’re right,” agreed Anthony. “There’s one thing I’d like you
to tell me,” he continued.

“What’s that?”

“Why did you seem so surprised when I mentioned the name of Jimmy
McGrath to you yesterday at Pont Street? Had you heard it before?”

“I had, Sherlock Holmes. George—my cousin, George Lomax, you
know—came to see me the other day, and suggested a lot of frightfully
silly things. His idea was that I should come down here and make
myself agreeable to this man McGrath and Delilah the Memoirs out of
him somehow. He didn’t put it like that, of course. He talked a lot of
nonsense about English gentlewomen, and things like that, but his real
meaning was never obscure for a moment. It was just the sort of rotten
thing poor old George would think of. And then I wanted to know too
much, and he tried to put me off with lies that wouldn’t have deceived
a child of two.”

“Well, his plan seems to have succeeded, anyhow,” observed Anthony.
“Here am I, the James McGrath he had in mind, and here are you being
agreeable to me.”

“But, alas, for poor old George, no Memoirs! Now I’ve got a question
for you. When I said I hadn’t written those letters, you said you knew
I hadn’t—you couldn’t know any such thing?”

“Oh, yes, I could,” said Anthony, smiling. “I’ve got a good working
knowledge of psychology.”

“You mean your belief in the sterling worth of my moral character was
such that——”

But Anthony was shaking his head vigorously.

“Not at all. I don’t know anything about your moral character. You
might have a lover, and you might write to him. But you’d never lie
down to be blackmailed. The Virginia Revel of those letters was scared
stiff. You’d have fought.”

“I wonder who the real Virginia Revel is—where she is, I mean. It
makes me feel as though I had a double somewhere.”

Anthony lit a cigarette.

“You know that one of the letters was written from Chimneys?” he asked
at last.

“What?” Virginia was clearly startled. “When was it written?”

“It wasn’t dated. But it’s odd, isn’t it?”

“I’m perfectly certain no other Virginia Revel has ever stayed at
Chimneys. Bundle or Lord Caterham would have said something about the
coincidence of the name if she had.”

“Yes. It’s rather queer. Do you know, Mrs. Revel, I am beginning to
disbelieve profoundly in this other Virginia Revel.”

“She’s very elusive,” agreed Virginia.

“Extraordinarily elusive. I am beginning to think that the person who
wrote those letters deliberately used your name.”

“But why?” cried Virginia. “Why should they do such a thing?”

“Ah, that’s just the question. There’s the devil of a lot to find out
about everything.”

“Who do you really think killed Michael?” asked Virginia suddenly. “The
Comrades of the Red Hand?”

“I suppose they might have done so,” said Anthony in a dissatisfied
voice. “Pointless killing would be rather characteristic of them.”

“Let’s get to work,” said Virginia. “I see Lord Caterham and Bundle
strolling together. The first thing to do is to find out definitely
whether the dead man is Michael or not.”

Anthony paddled to shore and a few moments later they had joined Lord
Caterham and his daughter.

“Lunch is late,” said his lordship in a depressed voice. “Battle has
insulted the cook, I expect.”

“This is a friend of mine, Bundle,” said Virginia. “Be nice to him.”

Bundle looked earnestly at Anthony for some minutes, and then addressed
a remark to Virginia as though he had not been there.

“Where do you pick up these nice-looking men, Virginia? ‘How do you do
it?’ says she enviously.”

“You can have him,” said Virginia generously. “I want Lord Caterham.”

She smiled upon the flattered peer, slipped her hand through his arm
and they moved off together.

“Do you talk?” asked Bundle. “Or are you just strong and silent?”

“Talk?” said Anthony. “I babble. I murmur. I gurgle—like the running
brook, you know. Sometimes I even ask questions.”

“As for instance?”

“Who occupies the second room on the left from the end?”

He pointed to it as he spoke.

“What an extraordinary question!” said Bundle. “You intrigue me
greatly. Let me see—yes—that’s Mademoiselle Brun’s room. The French
governess. She endeavours to keep my young sisters in order. Dulcie and
Daisy—like the song, you know. I dare say they’d have called the next
one, Dorothy May. But mother got tired of having nothing but girls and
died. Thought some one else could take on the job of providing an heir.”

“Mademoiselle Brun,” said Anthony thoughtfully. “How long has she been
with you?”

“Two months. She came to us when we were in Scotland.”

“Ha!” said Anthony. “I smell a rat.”

“I wish I could smell some lunch,” said Bundle. “Do I ask the Scotland
Yard man to have lunch with us, Mr. Cade? You’re a man of the world,
you know about the etiquette of such things. We’ve never had a murder
in the house before. Exciting, isn’t it? I’m sorry your character
was so completely cleared this morning. I’ve always wanted to meet a
murderer and see for myself if they’re as genial and charming as the
Sunday papers always say they are. God! what’s that?”

“What” seemed to be a taxi approaching the house. Its two occupants
were a tall man with a bald head and a black beard, and a smaller
and younger man with a black moustache. Anthony recognized the
former, and guessed that it was he—rather than the vehicle which
contained him—that had wrung the exclamation of astonishment from his
companion’s lips.

“Unless I much mistake,” he remarked, “that is my old friend, Baron
Lollipop.”

“Baron what?”

“I call him Lollipop for convenience. The pronouncing of his own name
tends to harden the arteries.”

“It nearly wrecked the telephone this morning,” remarked Bundle. “So
that’s the Baron, is it? I foresee he’ll be turned on to me this
afternoon—and I’ve had Isaacstein all the morning. Let George do his
own dirty work, say I, and to hell with politics. Excuse me leaving
you, Mr. Cade, but I must stand by poor old Father.”

Bundle retreated rapidly to the house.

Anthony stood looking after her for a minute or two and thoughtfully
lighted a cigarette. As he did so, his ear was caught by a stealthy
sound quite near him. He was standing by the boat-house, and the sound
seemed to come from just round the corner. The mental picture conveyed
to him was that of a man vainly trying to stifle a sudden sneeze.

“Now I wonder—I very much wonder who’s behind the boat-house,” said
Anthony to himself. “We’d better see, I think.”

Suiting the action to the word, he threw away the match he had just
blown out, and ran lightly and noiselessly round the corner of the
boat-house.

He came upon a man who had evidently been kneeling on the ground and
was just struggling to rise to his feet. He was tall, wore a light
coloured overcoat and glasses, and for the rest, had a short pointed
black beard and a slightly foppish manner. He was between thirty and
forty years of age, and altogether of a most respectable appearance.

“What are you doing here?” asked Anthony.

He was pretty certain that the man was not one of Lord Caterham’s
guests.

“I ask your pardon,” said the stranger, with a marked foreign accent
and what was meant to be an engaging smile. “It is that I wish to
return to the _Jolly Crickets_, and I have lost my way. Would Monsieur
be so good as to direct me?”

“Certainly,” said Anthony. “But you don’t go there by water, you know.”

“Eh?” said the stranger, with the air of one at a loss.

“I said,” repeated Anthony, with a meaning glance at the boat-house,
“that you won’t get there by water. There’s a right of way across the
park—some distance away, but all this is the private part. You’re
trespassing.”

“I am most sorry,” said the stranger. “I lost my direction entirely. I
thought I would come up here and inquire.”

Anthony refrained from pointing out that kneeling behind a boat-house
was a somewhat peculiar manner of prosecuting inquiries. He took the
stranger kindly by the arm.

“You go this way,” he said. “Right round the lake and straight on—you
can’t miss the path. When you get on it, turn to the left, and it will
lead you to the village. You’re staying at the _Cricketers_, I suppose?”

“I am, monsieur. Since this morning. Many thanks for your kindness in
directing me.”

“Don’t mention it,” said Anthony. “I hope you haven’t caught cold.”

“Eh?” said the stranger.

“From kneeling on the damp ground, I mean,” explained Anthony. “I
fancied I heard you sneezing.”

“I may have sneezed,” admitted the other.

“Quite so,” said Anthony. “But you shouldn’t suppress a sneeze, you
know. One of the most eminent doctors said so only the other day.
It’s frightfully dangerous. I don’t remember exactly what it does to
you—whether it’s an inhibition or whether it hardens your arteries,
but you must never do it. Good morning.”

“Good morning, and thank you, monsieur, for setting me on the right
road.”

“Second suspicious stranger from village inn,” murmured Anthony to
himself, as he watched the other’s retreating form. “And one that I
can’t quite place, either. Appearance that of a French commercial
traveller. I don’t quite see him as a Comrade of the Red Hand. Does he
represent yet a third party in the harassed state of Herzoslovakia?
The French governess has the second window from the end. A mysterious
Frenchman is found slinking round the grounds, listening to
conversations that are not meant for his ears. I’ll bet my hat there’s
something in it.”

Musing thus, Anthony retraced his steps to the house. On the terrace
he encountered Lord Caterham, looking suitably depressed, and two new
arrivals. He brightened a little at the sight of Anthony.

“Ah, there you are,” he remarked. “Let me introduce you to
Baron—er—er—and Captain Andrassy. Mr. Anthony Cade.”

The Baron stared at Anthony with growing suspicion.

“Mr. Cade?” he said stiffly. “I think not.”

“A word alone with you, Baron,” said Anthony. “I can explain
everything.”

The Baron bowed, and the two men walked down the terrace together.

“Baron,” said Anthony. “I must throw myself upon your mercy. I have so
far strained the honour of an English gentleman as to travel to this
country under an assumed name. I represented myself to you as Mr. James
McGrath—but you must see for yourself that the deception involved
was infinitesimal. You are doubtless acquainted with the works of
Shakespeare, and his remarks about the unimportance of the nomenclature
of roses? This case is the same. The man you wanted to see was the man
in possession of the Memoirs. I was that man. As you know only too
well, I am no longer in possession of them. A neat trick. Baron, a very
neat trick. Who thought of it, you or your principal?”

“His Highness’s own idea it was. And for anyone but him to carry it out
he would not permit.”

“He did it jolly well,” said Anthony, with approval. “I never took him
for anything but an Englishman.”

“The education of an English gentleman did the Prince receive,”
explained the Baron. “The custom of Herzoslovakia it is.”

“No professional could have pinched those papers better,” said Anthony.
“May I ask, without indiscretion, what has become of them?”

“Between gentlemen,” began the Baron.

“You are too kind, Baron,” murmured Anthony. “I’ve never been called a
gentleman so often as I have in the last forty-eight hours.”

“I to you say this—I believe them to be burnt.”

“You believe, but you don’t know, eh? Is that it?”

“His Highness in his own keeping retained them. His purpose it was to
read them and then by the fire to destroy them.”

“I see,” said Anthony. “All the same, they are not the kind of light
literature you’d skim through in half an hour.”

“Among the effects of my martyred master they have not discovered been.
It is clear, therefore, that burnt they are.”

“H’m!” said Anthony. “I wonder?”

He was silent for a minute or two and then went on.

“I have asked you these questions, Baron, because, as you may have
heard, I myself have been implicated in the crime. I must clear myself
absolutely, so that no suspicion attaches to me.”

“Undoubtedly,” said the Baron. “Your honour demands it.”

“Exactly,” said Anthony. “You put these things so well. I haven’t got
the knack of it. To continue, I can only clear myself by discovering
the real murderer, and to do that I must have all the facts. This
question of the Memoirs is very important. It seems to me possible that
to gain possession of them might be the motive of the crime. Tell me,
Baron, is that a very far-fetched idea?”

The Baron hesitated for a moment or two.

“You yourself the Memoirs have read?” he asked cautiously at length.

“I think I am answered,” said Anthony, smiling. “Now Baron, there’s
just one thing more. I should like to give you fair warning that it
is still my intention to deliver that manuscript to the publishers on
Wednesday next, the 13th of October.”

The Baron stared at him.

“But you have no longer got it?”

“On Wednesday next, I said. To-day is Friday. That gives me five days
to get hold of it again.”

“But if it is burnt?”

“I don’t think it is burnt. I have good reasons for not believing so.”

As he spoke they turned the corner of the terrace. A massive figure was
advancing towards them. Anthony, who had not yet seen the great Mr.
Herman Isaacstein, looked at him with considerable interest.

“Ah, Baron,” said Isaacstein, waving the big black cigar he was
smoking, “this is a bad business—a very bad business.”

“My good friend, Mr. Isaacstein, it is indeed,” cried the Baron. “All
our noble edifice in ruins is.”

Anthony tactfully left the two gentlemen to their lamentations, and
retraced his steps along the terrace.

Suddenly he came to a halt. A thin spiral of smoke was rising into the
air apparently from the very centre of the yew hedge.

“It must be hollow in the middle,” reflected Anthony. “I’ve heard of
such things before.”

He looked swiftly to right and left of him. Lord Caterham was at the
farther end of the terrace with Captain Andrassy. Their backs were
towards him. Anthony bent down and wriggled his way through the massive
yew.

He had been quite right in his supposition. The yew hedge was really
not one, but two, a narrow passage divided them. The entrance to this
was about half-way up, on the side of the house. There was no mystery
about it, but no one seeing the yew hedge from the front would have
guessed at the probability.

Anthony looked down the narrow vista. About half-way down, a man was
reclining in a basket chair. A half-smoked cigar rested on the arm of
the chair, and the gentleman himself appeared to be asleep.

“H’m!” said Anthony to himself. “Evidently Mr. Hiram Fish prefers
sitting in the shade.”




16

Tea in the Schoolroom


Anthony regained the terrace with the feeling uppermost in his mind
that the only safe place for private conversations was the middle of
the lake.

The resonant boom of a gong sounded from the house, and Tredwell
appeared in a stately fashion from a side door.

“Luncheon is served, my lord.”

“Ah!” said Lord Caterham, brisking up a little. “Lunch.”

At that moment two children burst out of the house. They were
high-spirited young women of twelve and ten, and though their names
might be Dulcie and Daisy, as Bundle had affirmed, they appeared to be
more generally known as Guggle and Winkle. They executed a kind of war
dance, interspersed with shrill whoops till Bundle emerged and quelled
them.

“Where’s Mademoiselle?” she demanded.

“She’s got the _migraine_, the _migraine_, the _migraine_!” chanted
Winkle.

“Hurrah!” said Guggle, joining in.

Lord Caterham had succeeded in shepherding most of his guests into the
house. Now he laid a restraining hand on Anthony’s arm.

“Come to my study,” he breathed. “I’ve got something rather special
there.”

Slinking down the hall, far more like a thief than like the master of
the house, Lord Caterham gained the shelter of his sanctum. Here he
unlocked a cupboard and produced various bottles.

“Talking to foreigners always makes me so thirsty,” he explained
apologetically. “I don’t know why it is.”

There was a knock on the door, and Virginia popped her head round the
corner of it.

“Got a special cocktail for me?” she demanded.

“Of course,” said Lord Caterham hospitably. “Come in.”

The next few minutes were taken up with serious rites.

“I needed that,” said Lord Caterham with a sigh, as he replaced his
glass on the table. “As I said just now, I find talking to foreigners
particularly fatiguing. I think it’s because they’re so polite. Come
along. Let’s have some lunch.”

He led the way to the dining-room. Virginia put her hand on Anthony’s
arm, and drew him back a little.

“I’ve done my good deed for the day,” she whispered. “I got Lord
Caterham to take me to see the body.”

“Well?” demanded Anthony eagerly.

One theory of his was to be proved or disproved.

Virginia was shaking her head.

“You were wrong,” she whispered. “It’s Prince Michael all right.”

“Oh!” Anthony was deeply chagrined.

“And Mademoiselle has the _migraine_,” he added aloud, in a
dissatisfied tone.

“What has that got to do with it?”

“Probably nothing, but I wanted to see her. You see, I’ve found out
that Mademoiselle has the second room from the end—the one where I saw
the light last night.”

“That’s interesting.”

“Probably there’s nothing in it. All the same, I mean to see
Mademoiselle before the day is out.”

Lunch was somewhat of an ordeal. Even the cheerful impartiality of
Bundle failed to reconcile the heterogeneous assembly. The Baron and
Andrassy were correct, formal, full of etiquette, and had the air of
attending a meal in a mausoleum. Lord Caterham was lethargic and
depressed. Bill Eversleigh stared longingly at Virginia. George, very
mindful of the trying position in which he found himself, conversed
weightily with the Baron and Mr. Isaacstein. Guggle and Winkle,
completely beside themselves with joy of having a murder in the house,
had to be continually checked and kept under, whilst Mr. Hiram Fish
slowly masticated his food, and drawled out dry remarks in his own
peculiar idiom. Superintendent Battle had considerately vanished, and
nobody knew what had become of him.

“Thank God that’s over,” murmured Bundle to Anthony, as they left the
table. “And George is taking the foreign contingent over to the Abbey
this afternoon to discuss State secrets.”

“That will possibly relieve the atmosphere,” agreed Anthony.

“I don’t mind the American so much,” continued Bundle. “He and Father
can talk first editions together quite happily in some secluded spot.
Mr. Fish”—as the object of their conversation drew near—“I’m planning
a peaceful afternoon for you.”

The American bowed.

“That’s too kind of you, Lady Eileen.”

“Mr. Fish,” said Anthony, “had quite a peaceful morning.”

Mr. Fish shot a quick glance at him.

“Ah, sir, you observed me, then, in my seclooded retreat? There are
moments, sir, when far from the madding crowd is the only motto for a
man of quiet tastes.”

Bundle had drifted on, and the American and Anthony were left together.
The former dropped his voice a little.

“I opine,” he said, “that there is considerable mystery about this
little dust up?”

“Any amount of it,” said Anthony.

“That guy with the bald head was perhaps a family connection?”

“Something of the kind.”

“These Central European nations beat the band,” declared Mr. Fish.
“It’s kind of being rumoured around that the deceased gentleman was a
Royal Highness. Is that so, do you know?”

“He was staying here as Count Stanislaus,” replied Anthony evasively.

To this Mr. Fish offered no further rejoinder than the somewhat cryptic:

“Oh! boy.”

After which he relapsed into silence for some moments.

“This police captain of yours,” he observed at last, “Battle, or
whatever his name is, is he the goods all right?”

“Scotland Yard thinks so,” replied Anthony dryly.

“He seems kind of hide-bound to me,” remarked Mr. Fish. “No hustle to
him. This big idea of his, letting no one leave the house, what is
there to it?”

He darted a very sharp look at Anthony as he spoke.

“Everyone’s got to attend the inquest to-morrow morning, you see.”

“That’s the idea, is it? No more to it than that? No question of Lord
Caterham’s guests being suspected?”

“My dear Mr. Fish!”

“I was getting a mite uneasy—being a stranger in this country. But of
course it was an outside job—I remember now. Window found unfastened,
wasn’t it?”

“It was,” said Anthony, looking straight in front of him.

Mr. Fish sighed. After a minute or two he said in a plaintive tone:

“Young man, do you know how they get the water out of a mine?”

“How?”

“By pumping—but its almighty hard work! I observe the figure of my
genial host detaching itself from the group over yonder. I must join
him.”

Mr. Fish walked gently away, and Bundle drifted back again.

“Funny Fish, isn’t he?” she remarked.

“He is.”

“It’s no good looking at Virginia,” said Bundle sharply.

“I wasn’t.”

“You were. I don’t know how she does it. It isn’t what she says, I
don’t even believe it’s what she looks. But, oh, boy! she gets there
every time. Anyway, she’s on duty elsewhere for the time. She told
me to be nice to you, and I’m going to be nice to you—by force if
necessary.”

“No force required,” Anthony assured her. “But, if it’s all the same to
you, I’d rather you were nice to me on the water, in a boat.”

“It’s not a bad idea,” said Bundle meditatively.

They strolled down to the lake together.

“There’s just one question I’d like to ask you,” said Anthony as
he paddled gently out from the shore, “before we turn to really
interesting topics. Business before pleasure.”

“Whose bedroom do you want to know about now?” asked Bundle with weary
patience.

“Nobody’s bedroom for the moment. But I would like to know where you
got your French governess from.”

“The man’s bewitched,” said Bundle. “I got her from an Agency, and I
pay her a hundred pounds a year, and her Christian name is Genevieve.
Anything more you want to know?”

“We’ll assume the Agency,” said Anthony. “What about her references?”

“Oh, glowing! She’d lived for ten years with the Countess of What Not.”

“What Not being——?”

“The Comtesses de Breteuil, Chateau de Breteuil, Dinard.”

“You didn’t actually see the Comtesse yourself? It was all done by
letter?”

“Exactly.”

“H’m!” said Anthony.

“You intrigue me,” said Bundle. “You intrigue me enormously. Is it love
or crime?”

“Probably sheer idiocy on my part. Let’s forget it.”

“‘Let’s forget it,’ said he negligently, having extracted all the
information he wants. Mr. Cade, who do you suspect? I rather suspect
Virginia as being the most unlikely person. Or possibly Bill.”

“What about you?”

“Member of the aristocracy joins in secret the Comrades of the Red
Hand. It would create a sensation all right.”

Anthony laughed. He liked Bundle, though he was a little afraid of the
shrewd penetration of her sharp grey eyes.

“You must be proud of all this,” he said suddenly, waving his hand
towards the great house in the distance.

Bundle screwed up her eyes and tilted her head on one side.

“Yes—it means something, I suppose. But one’s too used to it. Anyway,
we’re not here very much—too deadly dull. We’ve been at Cowes and
Deauville all the summer after town, and then up to Scotland. Chimneys
has been swathed in dust sheets for about five months. Once a week
they take the dust sheets off and chars-à-bancs full of tourists come
and gape, and listen to Tredwell. ‘On your right is the portrait of
the fourth Marchioness of Caterham, painted by Sir Joshua Reynolds,’
etc., and Ed or Bert, the humorist of the party, nudges his girl and
says ‘Eh! Gladys, they’ve got two pennyworth of pictures here, right
enough.’ And then they go and look at more pictures and yawn and
shuffle their feet and wish it was time to go home.”

“Yet history has been made here once or twice, by all accounts.”

“You’ve been listening to George,” said Bundle sharply. “That’s the
kind of thing he’s always saying.”

But Anthony had raised himself on his elbow, and was staring at the
shore.

“Is that a third suspicious stranger I see standing disconsolately by
the boat-house? Or is it one of the house party?”

Bundle lifted her head from the scarlet cushion.

“It’s Bill,” she said.

“He seems to be looking for something.”

“He’s probably looking for me,” said Bundle, without enthusiasm.

“Shall we row quickly in the opposite direction?”

“That’s quite the right answer, but it should be delivered with more
enthusiasm.”

“I shall row with double vigour after that rebuke.”

“Not at all,” said Bundle. “I have my pride. Row me to where that young
ass is waiting. Somebody’s got to look after him, I suppose. Virginia
must have given him the slip. One of these days, inconceivable as it
seems, I might want to marry George, so I might as well practise being
‘one of our well known political hostesses.’”

Anthony pulled obediently towards the shore.

“And what’s to become of me, I should like to know?” he complained.
“I refuse to be the unwanted third. Is that the children I see in the
distance?”

“Yes. Be careful, or they’ll rope you in.”

“I’m rather fond of children,” said Anthony. “I might teach them some
nice quiet intellectual game.”

“Well, don’t say I didn’t warn you.”

Having relinquished Bundle to the care of her gallant captain, Anthony
strolled off to where various shrill cries disturbed the peace of the
afternoon. He was received with acclamation.

“Are you any good at playing Red Indians?” asked Guggle sternly.

“Rather,” said Anthony. “You should hear the noise I make when I’m
being scalped. Like this.” He illustrated.

“Not so bad,” said Winkle grudgingly. “Now do the scalper’s yell.”

Anthony obliged with a blood-curdling noise. In another minute the game
of Red Indians was in full swing.

About an hour later, Anthony wiped his forehead, and ventured to
inquire after Mademoiselle’s _migraine_. He was pleased to hear that
that lady had entirely recovered. So popular had he become that he was
urgently invited to come and have tea in the schoolroom.

“And then you can tell us about the man you saw hung,” urged Guggle.

“Did you say you’d got a bit of the rope with you?” asked Winkle.

“It’s in my suit-case,” said Anthony solemnly. “You shall each have a
piece of it.”

Winkle immediately let out a Wild Indian yell of satisfaction.

“We’ll have to go and get washed, I suppose,” said Guggle gloomily.
“You will come to tea, won’t you? You won’t forget?”

Anthony swore solemnly that nothing should prevent his keeping the
engagement. Satisfied, the youthful pair beat a retreat towards the
house. Anthony stood for a minute looking after them, and, as he did
so, he became aware of a man leaving the other side of a little copse
of trees and hurrying away across the park. He felt almost sure that it
was the same black-bearded stranger he had encountered that morning.
Whilst he was hesitating whether to go after him or not the trees just
ahead of him were parted and Mr. Hiram Fish stepped out into the open.
He stared slightly when he saw Anthony.

“A peaceful afternoon, Mr. Fish?” inquired the latter.

“I thank you, yes.”

Mr. Fish did not look as peaceful as usual, however. His face was
flushed, and he was breathing hard as though he had been running. He
drew out his watch and consulted it.

“I guess,” he said softly, “it’s just about time for your British
institution of afternoon tea.”

Closing his watch with a snap, Mr. Fish ambled gently away in the
direction of the house.

Anthony stood in a brown study and awoke with a start to the fact that
Superintendent Battle was standing beside him. Not the faintest sound
had heralded his approach, and he seemed literally to have materialized
from space.

“Where did you spring from?” asked Anthony irritably.

With a slight jerk of his head, Battle indicated the little copse of
trees behind them.

“It seems a popular spot this afternoon,” remarked Anthony.

“You were very lost in thought, Mr. Cade?”

“I was indeed. Do you know what I was doing, Battle? I was trying to
put two and one and five and three together so as to make four. And it
can’t be done, Battle, it simply can’t be done.”

“There’s difficulties that way,” agreed the detective.

“But you’re just the man I wanted to see. Battle, I want to go away.
Can it be done?”

True to his creed, Superintendent Battle showed neither emotion nor
surprise. His reply was easy and matter of fact.

“That depends, sir, as to where you want to go.”

“I’ll tell you exactly, Battle. I’ll lay my cards upon the table.
I want to go to Dinard, to the Chateau of Madame la Comtesse de
Breteuil. Can it be done?”

“When do you want to go, Mr. Cade?”

“Say to-morrow after the inquest. I could be back here by Sunday
evening.”

“I see,” said the superintendent, with peculiar solidity.

“Well, what about it?”

“I’ve no objection, provided you go where you say you’re going, and
come straight back here.”

“You’re a man in a thousand, Battle. Either you have taken an
extraordinary fancy to me or else you’re extraordinarily deep. Which is
it?”

Superintendent Battle smiled a little, but did not answer.

“Well, well,” said Anthony, “I expect you’ll take your precautions.
Discreet minions of the law will follow my suspicious footsteps. So be
it. But I do wish I knew what it was all about.”

“I don’t get you, Mr. Cade.”

“The Memoirs—what all the fuss is about. Were they only Memoirs? Or
have you got something up your sleeve?”

Battle smiled again.

“Take it like this. I’m doing you a favour because you’ve made a
favourable impression on me, Mr. Cade. I’d like you to work in with
me over this case. The amateur and the professional, they go well
together. The one has the intimacy, so to speak, and the other the
experience.”

“Well,” said Anthony slowly, “I don’t mind admitting that I’ve always
wanted to try my hand at unravelling a murder mystery.”

“Any ideas about the case at all, Mr. Cade?”

“Plenty of them,” said Anthony. “But they’re mostly questions.”

“As, for instance?”

“Who steps into the murdered Michael’s shoes? It seems to me that that
is important?”

A rather wry smile came over Superintendent Battle’s face.

“I wondered if you’d think of that, sir. Prince Nicolas Obolovitch is
the next heir—first cousin of this gentleman.”

“And where is he at the present moment?” asked Anthony, turning away
to light a cigarette. “Don’t tell me you don’t know, Battle, because I
shan’t believe you.”

“We’ve reason to believe that he’s in the United States. He was until
quite lately, at all events. Raising money on his expectations.”

Anthony gave vent to a surprised whistle.

“I get you,” said Anthony. “Michael was backed by England, Nicholas
by America. In both countries a group of financiers are anxious to
obtain the oil concessions. The Loyalist party adopted Michael as their
candidate—now they’ll have to look elsewhere. Gnashing of teeth on the
part of Isaacstein and Co. and Mr. George Lomax. Rejoicings in Wall
Street. Am I right?”

“You’re not far off,” said Superintendent Battle.

“H’m!” said Anthony. “I almost dare swear that I know what you were
doing in that copse.”

The detective smiled, but made no reply.

“International politics are very fascinating,” said Anthony, “but I
fear I must leave you. I have an appointment in the schoolroom.”

He strode briskly away towards the house. Inquiries of the dignified
Tredwell showed him the way to the schoolroom. He tapped on the door
and entered, to be greeted by squeals of joy.

Guggle and Winkle immediately rushed at him and bore him in triumph to
be introduced to Mademoiselle.

For the first time, Anthony felt a qualm. Mademoiselle Brun was a
small, middle-aged woman with a sallow face, pepper and salt hair, and
a budding moustache!

As the notorious foreign adventuress she did not fit into the picture
at all.

“I believe,” said Anthony to himself, “I’m making the most utter fool
of myself. Never mind, I must go through with it now.”

He was extremely pleasant to Mademoiselle, and she, on her part,
was evidently delighted to have a good-looking young man invade her
schoolroom. The meal was a great success.

But that evening, alone in the charming bedchamber that had been
allotted to him, Anthony shook his head several times.

“I’m wrong,” he said to himself. “For the second time, I’m wrong.
Somehow or other, I can’t get the hang of this thing.”

He stopped in his pacing of the floor.

“What the devil——” began Anthony.

The door was being softly opened. In another minute a man had slipped
into the room, and stood deferentially by the door.

He was a big fair man, squarely built, with high Slavonic cheek-bones,
and dreamy fanatic eyes.

“Who the devil are you?” asked Anthony, staring at him.

The man replied in perfect English.

“I am Boris Anchoukoff.”

“Prince Michael’s servant, eh?”

“That is so. I served my master. He is dead. Now I serve you.”

“It’s very kind of you,” said Anthony. “But I don’t happen to want a
valet.”

“You are my master now. I will serve you faithfully.”

“Yes—but—look here—I don’t need a valet. I can’t afford one.”

Boris Anchoukoff looked at him with a touch of scorn.

“I do not ask for money. I served my master. So will I serve you—to
the death!”

Stepping quickly forward, he dropped on one knee, caught Anthony’s hand
and placed it on his forehead. Then he rose swiftly and left the room
as suddenly as he had come.

Anthony stared after him, his face a picture of astonishment.

“That’s damned odd,” he said to himself. “A faithful sort of dog.
Curious the instincts these fellows have.”

He rose and paced up and down.

“All the same,” he muttered, “it’s awkward—damned awkward—just at
present.”




17

A Midnight Adventure


The inquest took place on the following morning. It was extraordinarily
unlike the inquests as pictured in sensational fiction. It satisfied
even George Lomax in its rigid suppression of all interesting details.
Superintendent Battle and the Coroner, working together with the
support of the Chief Constable, had reduced the proceedings to the
lowest level of boredom.

Immediately after the inquest, Anthony took an unostentatious departure.

His departure was the one bright spot in the day for Bill Eversleigh.
George Lomax, obsessed with the fear that something damaging to his
Department might leak out, had been exceedingly trying. Miss Oscar and
Bill had been in constant attendance. Everything useful and interesting
had been done by Miss Oscar. Bill’s part had been to run to and fro
with countless messages, to decode telegrams, and to listen by the hour
to George repeating himself.

It was a completely exhausted young man who retired to bed on Saturday
night. He had had practically no chance to talk to Virginia all
day, owing to George’s exactions, and he felt injured and ill-used.
Thank goodness, that Colonial fellow had taken himself off. He had
monopolized far too much of Virginia’s society anyway. And of course
if George Lomax went on making an ass of himself like this—— His
mind seething with resentment, Bill fell asleep. And, in dreams, came
consolation. For he dreamt of Virginia.

It was an heroic dream, a dream of burning timbers in which he played
the part of the gallant rescuer. He brought down Virginia from the
topmost story in his arms. She was unconscious. He laid her on the
grass. Then he went off to find a packet of sandwiches. It was most
important that he should find that packet of sandwiches. George had it,
but instead of giving it up to Bill, he began to dictate telegrams.
They were now in the vestry of a church, and any minute Virginia might
arrive to be married to him. Horror! He was wearing pyjamas. He must
get home at once and find his proper clothes. He rushed out to the
car. The car would not start. No petrol in the tank! He was getting
desperate. And then a big General ’bus drew up and Virginia got out
of it on the arm of the bald headed Baron. She was deliciously cool,
and exquisitely dressed in grey. She came over to him and shook him by
the shoulders playfully. “Bill,” she said. “Oh, Bill.” She shook him
harder. “Bill,” she said. “Wake up. Oh, do wake up!”

Very dazed, Bill woke up. He was in his bedroom at Chimneys. But part
of the dream was with him still. Virginia was leaning over him, and was
repeating the same words with variations.

“Wake up, Bill. Oh, do wake up. Bill.”

“Hullo!” said Bill, sitting up in bed. “What’s the matter?”

Virginia gave a sigh of relief.

“Thank goodness. I thought you’d never wake up. I’ve been shaking you
and shaking you. Are you properly awake now?”

“I think so,” said Bill doubtfully.

“You great lump,” said Virginia. “The trouble I’ve had! My arms are
aching.”

“These insults are uncalled for,” said Bill, with dignity. “Let me say,
Virginia, that I consider your conduct most unbecoming. Not at all that
of a pure young widow.”

“Don’t be an idiot, Bill. Things are happening.”

“What kind of things?”

“Queer things. In the Council Chamber. I thought I heard a door bang
somewhere, and I came down to see. And then saw a light in the Council
Chamber. I crept along the passage, and peeped through the crack of the
door. I couldn’t see much, but what I could see was so extraordinary
that I felt I must see more. And then, all of a sudden, I felt that I
should like a nice, big, strong man with me. And you were the nicest
and biggest and strongest man I could think of, so I came in and tried
to wake you up quietly. But I’ve been ages doing it.”

“I see,” said Bill. “And what do you want me to do now? Get up and
tackle the burglars?”

Virginia wrinkled her brows.

“I’m not sure that they are burglars. Bill, it’s very queer—— But
don’t let’s waste time talking. Get up.”

Bill slipped obediently out of bed.

“Wait while I don a pair of boots—the big ones with nails in them.
However big and strong I am, I’m not going to tackle hardened criminals
with bare feet.”

“I like your pyjamas, Bill,” said Virginia dreamily. “Brightness
without vulgarity.”

“While we’re on the subject,” remarked Bill, reaching for his second
boot, “I like that thingummybob of yours. It’s a pretty shade of green.
What do you call it? It’s not just a dressing-gown, is it?”

“It’s a _négligé_” said Virginia. “I’m glad you’ve led such a pure
life, Bill.”

“I haven’t,” said Bill indignantly.

“You’ve just betrayed the fact. You’re very nice, Bill, and I like you.
I dare say that to-morrow morning—say about ten o’clock, a good safe
hour for not unduly exciting the emotions—I might even kiss you.”

“I always think these things are best carried out on the spur of the
moment,” suggested Bill.

“We’ve other fish to fry,” said Virginia. “If you don’t want to put on
a gas mask and a shirt of chain mail, shall we start?”

“I’m ready,” said Bill.

He wriggled into a lurid silk dressing-gown, and picked up a poker.

“The orthodox weapon,” he observed.

“Come on,” said Virginia, “and don’t make a noise.”

They crept out of the room and along the corridor, and then down the
wide double staircase. Virginia frowned as they reached the bottom of
it.

“Those boots of yours aren’t exactly domes of silence, are they, Bill?”

“Nails will be nails,” said Bill. “I’m doing my best.”

“You’ll have to take them off,” said Virginia firmly.

Bill groaned.

“You can carry them in your hand. I want to see if you can make out
what’s going on in the Council Chamber. Bill, it’s awfully mysterious.
Why should burglars take a man in armour to pieces?”

“Well, I suppose they can’t take him away whole very well. They
disarticulate him, and pack him neatly.”

Virginia shook her head, dissatisfied.

“What should they want to steal a mouldy old suit of armour for? Why,
Chimneys is full of treasures that are much easier to take away.”

Bill shook his head.

“How many of them are there?” he asked, taking a firmer grip of his
poker.

“I couldn’t see properly. You know what a keyhole is. And they only had
a flashlight.”

“I expect they’ve gone by now,” said Bill hopefully.

He sat down on the bottom stair and drew off his boots. Then, holding
them in his hand, he crept along the passage that led to the Council
Chamber, Virginia close behind him. They halted outside the massive oak
door. All was silent within, but suddenly Virginia pressed his arm, and
he nodded. A bright light had shown for a minute through the keyhole.

Bill went down on his knees, and applied his eye to the orifice. What
he saw was confusing in the extreme. The scene of the drama that was
being enacted inside was evidently just to the left, out of his line
of vision. A subdued chink every now and then seemed to point to the
fact that the invaders were still dealing with the figure in armour.
There were two of these, Bill remembered. They stood together by the
wall just under the Holbein portrait. The light of the electric torch
was evidently being directed upon the operations in progress. It
left the rest of the room nearly in darkness. Once a figure flitted
across Bill’s line of vision, but there was not sufficient light to
distinguish anything about it. It might have been that of a man or a
woman. In a minute or two it flitted back again and then the subdued
chinking sounded again. Presently there came a new sound, a faint
tap-tap as of knuckles on wood.

Bill sat back on his heels suddenly.

“What is it?” whispered Virginia.

“Nothing. It’s no good going on like this. We can’t see anything, and
we can’t guess what they’re up to. I must go in and tackle them.”

He drew on his boots and stood up.

“Now, Virginia, listen to me. We’ll open the door as softly as
possible. You know where the switch of the electric light is?”

“Yes, just by the door.”

“I don’t think there are more than two of them. There may be only one.
I want to get well into the room. Then, when I say ‘Go’ I want you to
switch on the lights. Do you understand?”

“Perfectly.”

“And don’t scream or faint or anything. I won’t let anyone hurt you.”

“My hero!” murmured Virginia.

Bill peered at her suspiciously through the darkness. He heard a faint
sound which might have been either a sob or a laugh. Then he grasped
the poker firmly and rose to his feet. He felt that he was fully alive
to the situation.

Very softly he turned the handle of the door. It yielded and swung
gently inwards. Bill felt Virginia close beside him. Together they
moved noiselessly into the room.

At the farther end of the room, the torch was playing upon the Holbein
picture. Silhouetted against it was the figure of a man, standing on a
chair and gently tapping on the panelling! His back, of course, was to
them, and he merely loomed up as a monstrous shadow.

What more they might have seen cannot be told, for at that moment
Bill’s nails squeaked upon the parquet floor. The man swung round,
directing the powerful torch full upon them and almost dazzling them
with the sudden glare.

Bill did not hesitate.

“Go,” he roared to Virginia, and sprang for his man, as she obediently
pressed down the switch of the electric lights.

The big chandelier should have been flooded with light; but, instead,
all that happened was the click of the switch. The room remained in
darkness.

Virginia heard Bill curse freely. The next minute the air was filled
with panting, scuffling sounds. The torch had fallen to the ground and
extinguished itself in the fall. There was the sound of a desperate
struggle going on in the darkness, but as to who was getting the better
of it, and indeed as to who was taking part in it, Virginia had no
idea. Had there been anyone else in the room besides the man who was
tapping the panelling? There might have been. Their glimpse had been
only a momentary one.

Virginia felt paralysed. She hardly knew what to do. She dared not try
and join in the struggle. To do so might hamper and not aid Bill. Her
one idea was to stay in the doorway, so that anyone trying to escape
should not leave the room that way. At the same time, she disobeyed
Bill’s express instructions and screamed loudly and repeatedly for help.

She heard doors opening upstairs, and a sudden gleam of light from the
hall and the big staircase. If only Bill could hold his man until help
came.

But at that minute there was a final terrific upheaval. They must have
crashed into one of the figures in armour, for it fell to the ground
with a deafening noise. Virginia saw dimly a figure springing for the
window, and at the same time heard Bill cursing and disengaging himself
from fragments of armour.

For the first time, she left her post, and rushed wildly for the figure
at the window. But the window was already unlatched. The intruder had
no need to stop and fumble for it. He sprang out and raced away down
the terrace and round the corner of the house. Virginia raced after
him. She was young and athletic, and she turned the corner of the
terrace not many seconds after her quarry.

But there she ran headlong into the arms of a man who was emerging from
a small side door. It was Mr. Hiram P. Fish.

“Gee! It’s a lady,” he exclaimed. “Why, I beg your pardon, Mrs. Revel.
I took you for one of the thugs fleeing from justice.”

“He’s just passed this way,” cried Virginia breathlessly. “Can’t we
catch him?”

But, even as she spoke, she knew it was too late. The man must have
gained the park by now, and it was a dark night with no moon. She
retraced her steps to the Council Chamber, Mr. Fish by her side,
discoursing in a soothing monotone upon the habits of burglars in
general, of which he seemed to have a wide experience.

Lord Caterham, Bundle, and various frightened servants were standing in
the doorway of the Council Chamber.

“What the devil’s the matter?” asked Bundle. “Is it burglars? What are
you and Mr. Fish doing, Virginia? Taking a midnight stroll?”

Virginia explained the events of the evening.

“How frightfully exciting,” commented Bundle. “You don’t usually get
a murder and a burglary crowded into one week-end. What’s the matter
with the lights in here? They’re all right everywhere else.”

That mystery was soon explained. The bulbs had simply been removed
and laid in a row against the wall. Mounted on a pair of steps, the
dignified Tredwell, dignified even in undress, restored illumination to
the stricken apartment.

“If I am not mistaken,” said Lord Caterham in his sad voice as he
looked around him, “this room has recently been the centre of somewhat
violent activity.”

There was some justice in the remark. Everything that could have
been knocked over had been knocked over. The floor was littered with
splintered chairs, broken china, and fragments of armour.

“How many of them were there?” asked Bundle. “It seems to have been a
desperate fight.”

“Only one, I think,” said Virginia. But, even as she spoke, she
hesitated a little. Certainly only one person—a man—had passed out
through the window. But as she had rushed after him, she had had a
vague impression of a rustle somewhere close at hand. If so, the second
occupant of the room could have escaped through the door. Perhaps,
though, the rustle had been an effect of her own imagination.

Bill appeared suddenly at the window. He was out of breath and panting
hard.

“Damn the fellow!” he exclaimed wrathfully. “He’s escaped. I’ve been
hunting all over the place. Not a sign of him.”

“Cheer up, Bill,” said Virginia, “better luck next time.”

“Well,” said Lord Caterham, “what do you think we’d better do now? Go
back to bed? I can’t get hold of Badgworthy at this time of night.
Tredwell, you know the sort of thing that’s necessary. Just see to it,
will you?”

“Very good, my lord.”

With a sigh of relief, Lord Caterham prepared to retreat.

“That beggar, Isaacstein, sleeps soundly,” he remarked, with a touch of
envy. “You’d have thought all this row would have brought him down.” He
looked across at Mr. Fish. “You found time to dress, I see,” he added.

“I flung on a few articles of clothing, yes,” admitted the American.

“Very sensible of you,” said Lord Caterham. “Damned chilly things,
pyjamas.”

He yawned. In a rather depressed mood, the house party retired to bed.




18

Second Midnight Adventure


The first person that Anthony saw as he alighted from his train on the
following afternoon was Superintendent Battle. His face broke into a
smile.

“I’ve returned according to contract,” he remarked. “Did you come down
here to assure yourself of the fact?”

Battle shook his head.

“I wasn’t worrying about that, Mr. Cade. I happen to be going to
London, that’s all.”

“You have such a trustful nature, Battle.”

“Do you think so, sir?”

“No. I think you’re deep—very deep. Still waters, you know, and all
that sort of thing. So you’re going to London?”

“I am, Mr. Cade.”

“I wonder why.”

The detective did not reply.

“You’re so chatty,” remarked Anthony. “That’s what I like about you.”

A far-off twinkle showed in Battle’s eyes.

“What about your own little job, Mr. Cade?” he inquired. “How did that
go off?”

“I’ve drawn blank, Battle. For the second time I’ve been proved
hopelessly wrong. Galling, isn’t it?”

“What was the idea, sir, if I may ask?”

“I suspected the French governess, Battle. A: Upon the grounds of her
being the most unlikely person, according to the canons of the best
fiction. B: Because there was a light in her room on the night of the
tragedy.”

“That wasn’t much to go upon.”

“You are quite right. It was not. But I discovered that she had only
been here a short time, and I also found a suspicious Frenchman spying
round the place. You know all about him, I suppose?”

“You mean the man who calls himself M. Chelles? Staying at the
_Cricketers_? A traveller in silk.”

“That’s it, is it? What about him? What does Scotland Yard think?”

“His actions have been suspicious,” said Superintendent Battle
expressionlessly.

“Very suspicious, I should say. Well, I put two and two together.
French governess in the house, French stranger outside. I decided that
they were in league together, and I hurried off to interview the lady
with whom Mademoiselle Brun had lived for the last ten years. I was
fully prepared to find that she had never heard of any such person as
Mademoiselle Brun, but I was wrong, Battle. Mademoiselle is the genuine
article.”

Battle nodded.

“I must admit,” said Anthony, “that as soon as I spoke to her I had an
uneasy conviction that I was barking up the wrong tree. She seemed so
absolutely the governess.”

Again Battle nodded.

“All the same, Mr. Cade, you can’t always go by that. Women especially
can do a lot with make up. I’ve seen quite a pretty girl with the color
of her hair altered, a sallow complexion stain, slightly reddened
eyelids and, most efficacious of all, dowdy clothes, who would fail to
be identified by nine people out of ten who had seen her in her former
character. Men haven’t got quite the same pull. You can do something
with the eyebrows, and of course different sets of false teeth alter
the whole expression. But there are always the ears—there’s an
extraordinary lot of character in ears, Mr. Cade.”

“Don’t look so hard at mine, Battle,” complained Anthony. “You make me
quite nervous.”

“I’m not talking of false beard and grease paint,” continued the
superintendent. “That’s only for books. No, there are very few men
who can escape identification and put it over on you. In fact there’s
only one man I know who has a positive genius for impersonation. King
Victor. Ever heard of King Victor, Mr. Cade?”

There was something so sharp and sudden about the way the detective put
the question that Anthony half checked the words that were rising to
his lips.

“King Victor?” he said reflectively instead. “Somehow, I seem to have
heard the name.”

“One of the most celebrated jewel thieves in the world. Irish father,
French mother. Can speak five languages at least. He’s been serving a
sentence, but his time was up a few months ago.”

“Really? And where is he supposed to be now?”

“Well, Mr. Cade, that’s what we’d rather like to know.”

“The plot thickens,” said Anthony lightly. “No chance of his turning up
here, is there? But I suppose he wouldn’t be interested in political
Memoirs—only in jewels.”

“There’s no saying,” said Superintendent Battle. “For all we know, he
may be here already.”

“Disguised as the second footman? Splendid. You’ll recognize him by his
ears and cover yourself with glory.”

“Quite fond of your little joke, aren’t you, Mr. Cade? By the way, what
do you think of that curious business at Staines?”

“Staines?” said Anthony. “What’s been happening at Staines?”

“It was in Saturday’s papers. I thought you might have seen about it.
Man found by the roadside shot. A foreigner. It was in the papers again
to-day, of course.”

“I did see something about it,” said Anthony carelessly. “Not suicide,
apparently.”

“No. There was no weapon. As yet the man hasn’t been identified.”

“You seem very interested,” said Anthony, smiling. “No connection with
Prince Michael’s death, is there?”

His hand was quite steady. So were his eyes. Was it his fancy that
Superintendent Battle was looking at him with peculiar intentness?

“Seems to be quite an epidemic of that sort of thing,” said Battle.
“But, well, I dare say there’s nothing in it.”

He turned away, beckoning to a porter as the London train came
thundering in. Anthony drew a faint sigh of relief.

He strolled across the park in an unusually thoughtful mood. He
purposely chose to approach the house from the same direction as that
from which he had come on the fateful Thursday night, and as he drew
near to it he looked up at the windows cudgelling his brains to make
sure of the one where he had seen the light. Was he quite sure that it
was the second from the end?

And, doing so, he made a discovery. There was an angle at the corner of
the house in which was a window set farther back. Standing on one spot,
you counted this window as the first, and the first one built out over
the Council Chamber as the second, but move a few yards to the right
and the part built out over the Council Chamber appeared to be the end
of the house. The first window was invisible, and the two windows of
the rooms over the Council Chamber would have appeared the first and
second from the end. Where exactly had he been standing when he had
seen the light flash up?

Anthony found the question very hard to determine. A matter of a yard
or so made all the difference. But one point was made abundantly clear.
It was quite possible that he had been mistaken in describing the light
as occurring in the second room from the end. It might equally well
have been the _third_.

Now who occupied the third room? Anthony was determined to find that
out as soon as possible. Fortune favoured him. In the hall Tredwell had
just set the massive silver urn in its place on the tea tray. Nobody
else was there.

“Hullo, Tredwell,” said Anthony. “I wanted to ask you something. Who
has the third room from the end on the West side? Over the Council
Chamber, I mean.”

Tredwell reflected for a minute or two.

“That would be the American gentleman’s room, sir. Mr. Fish.”

“Oh, is it? Thank you.”

“Not at all, sir.”

Tredwell prepared to depart, then paused. The desire to be the first to
impart news makes even pontifical butlers human.

“Perhaps you have heard, sir, of what occurred last night?”

“Not a word,” said Anthony. “What did occur last night?”

“An attempt at robbery, sir!”

“Not really? Was anything taken?”

“No, sir. The thieves were dismantling the suits of armour in
the Council Chamber when they were surprised and forced to flee.
Unfortunately they got clear away.”

“That’s very extraordinary,” said Anthony. “The Council Chamber again.
Did they break in that way?”

“It is supposed, sir, that they forced the window.”

Satisfied with the interest his information had aroused Tredwell
resumed his retreat, but brought up short with a dignified apology.

“I beg your pardon, sir. I didn’t hear you come in, and I didn’t know
you were standing just behind me.”

Mr. Isaacstein who had been the victim of the impact waved his hand in
a friendly fashion.

“No harm done, my good fellow. I assure you no harm done.”

Tredwell retired looking contemptuous, and Isaacstein came forward and
dropped into an easy-chair.

“Hullo, Cade, so you’re back again. Been hearing all about last night’s
little show?”

“Yes,” said Anthony. “Rather an exciting week-end, isn’t it?”

“I should imagine that last night was the work of local men,” said
Isaacstein. “It seems a clumsy, amateurish affair.”

“Is there anyone about here who collects armour?” asked Anthony. “It
seems a curious thing to select.”

“Very curious,” agreed Mr. Isaacstein. He paused a minute, and then
said slowly: “The whole position here is very unfortunate.”

There was something almost menacing in his tone.

“I don’t quite understand,” said Anthony.

“Why are we all being kept here in this way? The inquest was over
yesterday. The Prince’s body will be removed to London where it is
being given out that he died of heart failure. And still nobody is
allowed to leave the house. Mr. Lomax knows no more than I do. He
refers me to Superintendent Battle.”

“Superintendent Battle has something up his sleeve,” said Anthony
thoughtfully. “And it seems the essence of his plan that nobody should
leave.”

“But, excuse me, Mr. Cade, you have been away.”

“With a string tied to my leg. I’ve no doubt that I was shadowed the
whole time. I shouldn’t have been given a chance of disposing of the
revolver or anything of that kind.”

“Ah, the revolver,” said Isaacstein thoughtfully. “That has not yet
been found, I think?”

“Not yet.”

“Possibly thrown into the lake in passing.”

“Very possibly.”

“Where is Superintendent Battle? I have not seen him this afternoon.”

“He’s gone to London. I met him at the station.”

“Gone to London? Really? Did he say when he would be back?”

“Early to-morrow, so I understood.”

Virginia came in with Lord Caterham and Mr. Fish. She smiled a welcome
at Anthony.

“So you’re back, Mr. Cade. Have you heard all about our adventures last
night?”

“Why, trooly, Mr. Cade,” said Hiram Fish. “It was a night of strenuous
excitement. Did you hear that I mistook Mrs. Revel for one of the
thugs?”

“And in the meantime,” said Anthony, “the thug——?”

“Got clear away,” said Mr. Fish mournfully.

“Do pour out,” said Lord Caterham to Virginia. “I don’t know where
Bundle is.”

Virginia officiated. Then she came and sat down near Anthony.

“Come to the boat-house after tea,” she said in a low voice. “Bill and
I have got a lot to tell you.”

Then she joined lightly in the general conversation.

The meeting at the boat-house was duly held.

Virginia and Bill were bubbling over with their news. They agreed
that a boat in the middle of the lake was the only safe place for
confidential conversation. Having paddled out a sufficient distance,
the full story of last night’s adventure was related to Anthony. Bill
looked a little sulky. He wished Virginia would not insist on bringing
this Colonial fellow into it.

“It’s very odd,” said Anthony, when the story was finished. “What do
you make of it?” he asked Virginia.

“I think they were looking for something,” she returned promptly. “The
burglar idea is absurd.”

“They thought the something, whatever it was, might be concealed in
the suits of armour, that’s clear enough. But why tap the panelling?
That looks more as though they were looking for a secret staircase, or
something of that kind.”

“There’s a Priest’s Hole at Chimneys, I know,” said Virginia. “And I
believe there’s a secret staircase as well. Lord Caterham would tell us
all about it. What I want to know is, what can they have been looking
for?”

“It can’t be the Memoirs,” said Anthony. “They’re a great bulky
package. It must have been something small.”

“George knows, I expect,” said Virginia. “I wonder whether I could get
it out of him. All along I’ve felt there was something behind all this.”

“You say there was only one man,” pursued Anthony, “but that there
might possibly be another, as you thought you heard some one going
towards the door as you sprang to the window.”

“The sound was very slight,” said Virginia. “It might have been just my
imagination.”

“That’s quite possible, but in case it wasn’t your imagination the
second person must have been an inmate of the house. I wonder now——”

“What are you wondering at?” asked Virginia.

“The thoroughness of Mr. Hiram Fish who dresses himself completely when
he hears screams for help downstairs.”

“There’s something in that,” agreed Virginia. “And then there’s
Isaacstein who sleeps through it all. That’s suspicious too. Surely he
couldn’t?”

“There’s that fellow Boris,” suggested Bill. “He looks an unmitigated
ruffian. Michael’s servant, I mean.”

“Chimneys is full of suspicious characters,” said Virginia. “I dare
say the others are just as suspicious of us. I wish Superintendent
Battle hadn’t gone to London. I think it’s rather stupid of him. By the
way, Mr. Cade, I’ve seen that peculiar-looking Frenchman about once or
twice, spying round the park.”

“It’s a mix up,” confessed Anthony. “I’ve been away on a wild-goose
chase. Made a thorough ass of myself. Look here, to me the whole
question seems to resolve itself into this: Did the men find what they
were looking for last night?”

“Supposing they didn’t?” said Virginia. “I’m pretty sure they didn’t,
as a matter of fact.”

“Just this, I believe they’ll come again. They know, or they soon will
know, that Battle’s in London. They’ll take the risk and come again
to-night.”

“Do you really think so?”

“It’s a chance. Now we three will form a little syndicate. Eversleigh
and I will conceal ourselves with due precautions in the Council
Chamber——”

“What about me?” interrupted Virginia. “Don’t think you’re going to
leave me out of it.”

“Listen to me, Virginia,” said Bill. “This is man’s work——”

“Don’t be an idiot, Bill. I’m in on this. Don’t you make any mistake
about it. The syndicate will keep watch to-night.”

It was settled thus, and the details of the plan were laid. After the
party had retired to bed, first one and then another of the syndicate
crept down. They were all armed with powerful electric torches, and in
the pocket of Anthony’s coat lay a revolver.

Anthony had said that he believed another attempt to resume the search
would be made. Nevertheless, he did not expect that the attempt would
be made from outside. He believed that Virginia had been correct in her
guess that some one had passed her in the dark the night before, and as
he stood in the shadow of an old oak dresser it was towards the door
and not the window that his eyes were directed. Virginia was crouching
behind a figure in armour on the opposite wall, and Bill was by the
window.

The minutes passed, at interminable length. One o’clock chimed, then
the half-hour, then two, then another half-hour. Anthony felt stiff and
cramped. He was coming slowly to the conclusion that he had been wrong.
No attempt would be made to-night.

And then he stiffened suddenly, all his senses on the alert. He had
heard a footstep on the terrace outside. Silence again, then a low
scratching noise at the window. Suddenly it ceased, and the window
swung open. A man stepped across the sill into the room.

He stood quite still for a moment, peering round as though listening.
After a minute or two, seemingly satisfied, he switched on a torch
he carried, and turned it rapidly round the room. Apparently he saw
nothing unusual. The three watchers held their breath.

He went over to the same bit of panelled wall he had been examining the
night before.

And then a terrible knowledge smote Bill. He was going to sneeze! The
wild race through the dew-laden park the night before had given him a
chill. All day he had sneezed intermittently. A sneeze was due now, and
nothing on earth would stop it.

He adopted all the remedies he could think of. He pressed his upper
lip, swallowed hard, threw back his head and looked at the ceiling. As
a last resort he held his nose, and pinched it violently. It was of no
avail. He sneezed.

A stifled, checked, emasculated sneeze, but a startling sound in the
deadly quiet of the room.

The stranger sprang round, and in the same minute Anthony acted. He
flashed on his torch, and jumped full for the stranger. In another
minute they were down on the floor together.

“Lights,” shouted Anthony.

Virginia was ready at the switch. The lights came on true and full
to-night. Anthony was on top of his man, Bill leant down to give him a
hand.

“And now,” said Anthony, “let’s see who you are, my fine fellow.”

He rolled his victim over. It was the neat, dark-bearded stranger from
the _Cricketers_.

“Very nice indeed,” said an approving voice.

They all looked up startled. The bulky form of Superintendent Battle
was standing in the open doorway.

“I thought you were in London, Superintendent Battle,” said Anthony.

Battle’s eyes twinkled.

“Did you, sir?” he said. “Well, I thought it would be a good thing if I
was thought to be going.”

“And it has been,” agreed Anthony, looking down at his prostrate foe.

To his surprise there was a slight smile on the stranger’s face.

“May I get up, gentlemen?” he inquired. “You are three to one.”

Anthony kindly hauled him on to his legs. The stranger settled his
coat, pulled up his collar, and directed a keen look at Battle.

“I demand pardon,” he said, “but do I understand that you are a
representative from Scotland Yard?”

“That’s right,” said Battle.

“Then I will present to you my credentials.” He smiled rather ruefully.
“I would have been wise to do so before.”

He took some papers from his pocket and handed them to the Scotland
Yard detective. At the same time, he turned back the lapel of his coat
and showed something pinned there.

Battle gave an exclamation of astonishment. He looked through the
papers and handed them back with a little bow.

“I’m sorry you’ve been man-handled, monsieur,” he said, “but you
brought it on yourself, you know.”

He smiled, noting the astonished expression on the faces of the other.

“This is a colleague we have been expecting for some time,” he said.
“M. Lemoine, of the Sûreté in Paris.”




19

Secret History


They all stared at the French detective, who smiled back at them.

“But yes,” he said, “it is true.”

There was a pause for a general readjusting of ideas. Then Virginia
turned to Battle.

“Do you know what I think, Superintendent Battle?”

“What do you think, Mrs. Revel?”

“I think the time has come to enlighten us a little.”

“To enlighten you? I don’t quite understand, Mrs. Revel.”

“Superintendent Battle, you understand perfectly. I dare say Mr. Lomax
has hedged you about with recommendations of secrecy—George would,
but surely it’s better to tell us than have us stumbling on the secret
all by ourselves, and perhaps doing untold harm. M. Lemoine, don’t you
agree with me?”

“Madame, I agree with you entirely.”

“You can’t go on keeping things dark for ever,” said Battle. “I’ve
told Mr. Lomax so. Mr. Eversleigh is Mr. Lomax’s secretary, there’s no
objection to his knowing what there is to know. As for Mr. Cade, he’s
been brought into the thing willy-nilly, and I consider he’s a right to
know where he stands. But——”

Battle paused.

“I know,” said Virginia. “Women are so indiscreet! I’ve often heard
George say so.”

Lemoine had been studying Virginia attentively. Now he turned to the
Scotland Yard man.

“Did I hear you just now address Madame by the name of Revel?”

“That is my name,” said Virginia.

“Your husband was in the Diplomatic Service, was he not? And you were
with him in Herzoslovakia just before the assassination of the late
King and Queen.”

“Yes.”

Lemoine turned again.

“I think Madame has a right to hear the story. She is indirectly
concerned. Moreover”—his eyes twinkled a little—“Madame’s reputation
for discretion stands very high in Diplomatic circles.”

“I’m glad they give me a good character,” said Virginia, laughing. “And
I’m glad I’m not going to be left out of it.”

“What about refreshments?” said Anthony. “Where does the conference
take place? Here?”

“If you please, sir,” said Battle, “I’ve a fancy for not leaving this
room until morning. You’ll see why when you’ve heard the story.”

“Then I’ll go and forage,” said Anthony.

Bill went with him and they returned with a tray of glasses, siphons
and other necessaries of life.

The augmented syndicate established itself comfortably in the corner by
the window, being grouped round a long oak table.

“It’s understood, of course,” said Battle, “that anything that’s said
here is said in strict confidence. There must be no leakage. I’ve
always felt it would come out one of these days. Gentlemen like Mr.
Lomax who want everything hushed up take bigger risks than they think.
The start of this business was just over seven years ago. There was a
lot of what they call Reconstruction going on—especially in the Near
East. There was a good deal going on in England, strictly on the Q.T.
with that old gentleman, Count Stylptitch, pulling the strings. All
the Balkan States were interested parties, and there were a lot of
Royal Personages in England just then. I’m not going into details,
but Something disappeared—disappeared in a way that seemed incredible
unless you admitted two things—that the thief was a Royal Personage
and that at the same time it was the work of a high-class professional.
M. Lemoine here will tell you how that well might be.”

The Frenchman bowed courteously and took up the tale.

“It is possible that you in England may not even have heard of our
famous and fantastic King Victor. What his real name is, no one knows,
but he is a man of singular courage and daring, one who speaks five
languages and is unequalled in the art of disguise. Though his father
is known to have been either English or Irish, he himself has worked
chiefly in Paris. It was there, nearly eight years ago, that he was
carrying out a daring series of robberies and living under the name of
Captain O’Neill.”

A faint exclamation escaped Virginia. M. Lemoine darted a keen glance
at her.

“I think I understand what agitates Madame. You will see in a minute.
Now we of the Sûreté had our suspicions that this Captain O’Neill was
none other than ‘King Victor,’ but we could not obtain the necessary
proof. There was also in Paris at the time a clever young actress,
Angèle Mory, of the Folies Bergères. For some time we had suspected
that she was associated with the operations of King Victor. But again
no proof was forthcoming.

“About that time, Paris was preparing for the visit of the young King
Nicholas IV of Herzoslovakia. At the Sûreté we were given special
instructions as to the course to be adopted to ensure the safety of His
Majesty. In particular we were warned to superintend the activities of
a certain Revolutionary organization which called itself the Comrades
of the Red Hand. It is fairly certain now that the Comrades approached
Angèle Mory and offered her a huge sum if she would aid them in their
plans. Her part was to infatuate the young King, and decoy him to
some spot agreed upon with them. Angèle Mory accepted the bribe and
promised to perform her part.

“But the young lady was cleverer and more ambitious than her employers
suspected. She succeeded in captivating the King who fell desperately
in love with her and loaded her with jewels. It was then that she
conceived the idea of being—not a King’s mistress, but a Queen! As
every one knows, she realized her ambition. She was introduced into
Herzoslovakia as the Countess Varaga Popoleffsky, an offshoot of the
Romanoffs, and became eventually Queen Varaga of Herzoslovakia. Not
bad for a little Parisian actress! I have always heard that she played
the part extremely well. But her triumph was not to be long lived. The
Comrades of the Red Hand, furious at her betrayal, twice attempted
her life. Finally they worked up the country to such a pitch that a
Revolution broke out in which both the King and Queen perished. Their
bodies, horribly mutilated and hardly recognizable, were recovered,
attesting to the fury of the populace against the low-born foreign
Queen.

“Now, in all this, it seems certain that Queen Varaga still kept in
with her confederate, King Victor. It is possible that the bold plan
was his all along. What is known is that she continued to correspond
with him, in a secret code, from the Court of Herzoslovakia. For safety
the letters were written in English, and signed with the name of an
English lady then at the Embassy. If any inquiry had been made, and
the lady in question had denied her signature, it is possible that she
would not have been believed, for the letters were those of a guilty
woman to her lover. It was your name she used, Mrs. Revel.”

“I know,” said Virginia. Her colour was coming and going unevenly. “So
that is the truth of the letters! I have wondered and wondered.”

“What a blackguardly trick,” cried Bill indignantly.

“The letters were addressed to Captain O’Neill at his rooms in Paris,
and their principal purpose may have light shed upon it by a curious
fact which came to light later. After the assassination of the King
and Queen, many of the Crown Jewels which had fallen, of course, into
the hands of the mob, found their way to Paris, and it was discovered
that in nine cases out of ten the principal stones had been replaced
by paste—and mind you, there were some very famous stones among the
jewels of Herzoslovakia. So as a Queen, Angèle Mory still practised her
former activities.

“You see now where we have arrived. Nicholas IV and Queen Varaga came
to England and were the guests of the late Marquis of Caterham, then
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. Herzoslovakia is a small
country, but it could not be left out. Queen Varaga was necessarily
received. And there we have a Royal Personage and at the same time an
expert thief. There is also no doubt that the—er—substitute which was
so wonderful as to deceive anyone but an expert could only have been
fashioned by King Victor, and indeed the whole plan, in its daring and
audacity, pointed to him as the author.”

“What happened?” asked Virginia.

“Hushed up,” said Superintendent Battle laconically. “Not a mention of
it’s ever been made public to this day. We did all that could be done
on the quiet—and that was a good deal more than you’d ever imagine, by
the way. We’ve got methods of our own that would surprise. That jewel
didn’t leave England with the Queen of Herzoslovakia—I can tell you
that much. No, Her Majesty hid it somewhere—but where we’ve never been
able to discover. But I shouldn’t wonder”—Superintendent Battle let
his eyes wander gently round—“if it wasn’t somewhere in this room.”

Anthony leapt to his feet.

“What? After all these years?” he cried incredulously. “Impossible.”

“You do not know the peculiar circumstances, monsieur,” said the
Frenchman quickly. “Only a fortnight later, the Revolution in
Herzoslovakia broke out, and the King and Queen were murdered. Also,
Captain O’Neill was arrested in Paris and sentenced on a minor charge.
We hoped to find the packet of code letters in his house, but it
appears that this had been stolen by some Herzoslovakian go-between.
The man turned up in Herzoslovakia just before the Revolution, and then
disappeared completely.”

“He probably went abroad,” said Anthony thoughtfully. “To Africa as
likely as not. And you bet he hung on to that packet. It was as good
as a gold mine to him. It’s odd how things come about. They probably
called him Dutch Pedro or something like that out there.”

He caught Superintendent Battle’s expressionless glance bent upon him,
and smiled.

“It’s not really clairvoyance, Battle,” he said, “though it sounds like
it. I’ll tell you presently.”

“There is one thing you have not explained,” said Virginia. “Where does
this link up with the Memoirs? There must be a link, surely?”

“Madame is very quick,” said Lemoine approvingly. “Yes, there is a
link. Count Stylptitch was also staying at Chimneys at the time.”

“So that he might have known about it?”

“_Parfaitement._”

“And, of course,” said Battle, “if he’s blurted it out in his precious
Memoirs, the fat will be in the fire. Especially after the way the
whole thing was hushed up.”

Anthony lit a cigarette.

“There’s no possibility of there being a clue in the Memoirs as to
where the stone was hidden?” he asked.

“Very unlikely,” said Battle decisively. “He was never in with the
Queen—opposed the marriage tooth and nail. She’s not likely to have
taken him into her confidence.”

“I wasn’t suggesting such a thing for a minute,” said Anthony. “But
by all accounts he was a cunning old boy. Unknown to her, he may have
discovered where she hid the jewel. In that case, what would he have
done, do you think?”

“Sat tight,” said Battle, after a moment’s reflection.

“I agree,” said the Frenchman. “It was a ticklish moment, you see. To
return the stone anonymously would have presented great difficulties.
Also, the knowledge of its whereabouts would give him great power—and
he liked power, that strange old man. Not only did he hold the Queen
in the hollow of his hand, but he had a powerful weapon to negotiate
with at any time. It was not the only secret he possessed—oh, no!—he
collected secrets like some men collect rare pieces of china. It is
said that, once or twice before his death, he boasted to people of the
things he could make public if the fancy took him. And once at least
he declared that he intended to make some startling revelations in
his Memoirs. Hence”—the Frenchman smiled rather dryly—“the general
anxiety to get hold of them. Our own secret police intended to seize
them, but the Count took the precaution to have them conveyed away
before his death.”

“Still, there’s no real reason to believe that he knew this particular
secret,” said Battle.

“I beg your pardon,” said Anthony quietly. “There are his own words.”

“What?”

Both detectives stared at him as though unable to believe their ears.

“When Mr. McGrath gave me that manuscript to bring to England, he
told me the circumstances of his one meeting with Count Stylptitch.
It was in Paris. At some considerable risk to himself, Mr. McGrath
rescued the Count from a band of Apaches. He was, I understand—shall
we say a trifle—exhilarated? Being in that condition, he made two
rather interesting remarks. One of them was to the effect that he knew
where the Koh-i-noor was—a statement to which my friend paid very
little attention. He also said that the gang in question were King
Victor’s men. Taken together, those two remarks are very significant.”

“Good Lord,” ejaculated Superintendent Battle, “I should say they were.
Even the murder of Prince Michael wears a different aspect.”

“King Victor has never taken a life,” the Frenchman reminded him.

“Supposing he were surprised when he was searching for the jewel?”

“Is he in England, then?” asked Anthony sharply. “You say that he was
released a few months ago. Didn’t you keep track of him?”

A rather rueful smile overspread the French detective’s face.

“We tried to, monsieur. But he is a devil, that man. He gave us the
slip at once—at once. We thought, of course, that he would make
straight for England. But no. He went—where do you think?”

“Where?” said Anthony.

He was staring intently at the Frenchman, and absent-mindedly his
fingers played with a box of matches.

“To America. To the United States.”

“What?”

There was sheer amazement in Anthony’s tone.

“Yes, and what do you think he called himself? What part do you think
he played over there? The part of Prince Nicholas of Herzoslovakia.”

The match-box fell from Anthony’s hand, but his amazement was fully
equalled by that of Battle.

“Impossible.”

“Not so, my friend. You, too, will get the news in the morning. It
has been the most colossal bluff. As you know, Prince Nicholas was
rumoured to have died in the Congo years ago. Our friend, King Victor,
seizes on that—difficult to prove a death of that kind. He resurrects
Prince Nicholas, and plays him to such purpose that he gets away with a
tremendous haul of American dollars—all on account of the supposed oil
concessions. But by a mere accident, he was unmasked, and had to leave
the country hurriedly. This time he did come to England. And that is
why I am here. Sooner or later he will come to Chimneys. That is, if he
is not already here!”

“You think—that?”

“I think he was here the night Prince Michael died, and again last
night.”

“It was another attempt, eh?” said Battle.

“It was another attempt.”

“What has bothered me,” continued Battle, “was wondering what had
become of M. Lemoine here. I’d had word from Paris that he was on his
way over to work with me, and I couldn’t make out why he hadn’t turned
up.”

“I must indeed apologize,” said Lemoine. “You see, I arrived on the
morning after the murder. It occurred to me at once that it would
be as well for me to study things from an unofficial standpoint
without appearing officially as your colleague. I thought that great
possibilities lay that way. I was, of course, aware that I was bound to
be an object of suspicion, but that in a way furthered my plan since it
would not put people I was after on their guard. I can assure you that
I have seen a good deal that is interesting in the last two days.”

“But look here,” said Bill, “what really did happen last night?”

“I am afraid,” said M. Lemoine, “that I gave you rather violent
exercise.”

“It was you I chased then?”

“Yes. I will recount things to you. I came up here to watch, convinced
that the secret had to do with this room since the Prince had been
killed here. I stood outside on the terrace. Presently I became aware
that some one was moving about in this room. I could see the flash of a
torch now and again. I tried the middle window and found it unlatched.
Whether the man had entered that way earlier, or whether he had left
it so as a blind in case he was disturbed, I do not know. Very gently,
I pushed it back and slipped inside the room. Step by step I felt
my way until I was in a spot where I could watch operations without
likelihood of being discovered myself. The man himself I could not see
clearly. His back was to me, of course, and he was silhouetted against
the light of the torch so that his outline only could be seen. But his
actions filled me with surprise. He took to pieces first one and then
the other of those two suits of armour, examining each one piece by
piece. When he had convinced himself that what he sought was not there,
he began tapping the panelling of the wall under that picture. What he
would have done next, I do not know. The interruption came. _You_ burst
in——” He looked at Bill.

“Our well-meant interference was really rather a pity,” said Virginia
thoughtfully.

“In a sense, madame, it was. The man switched out his torch, and I, who
had no wish as yet to be forced to reveal my identity, sprang for the
window. I collided with the other two in the dark, and fell headlong. I
sprang up and out through the window. Mr. Eversleigh, taking me for his
assailant, followed.”

“I followed you first,” said Virginia. “Bill was only second in the
race.”

“And the other fellow had the sense to stay still and sneak out through
the door. I wonder he didn’t meet the rescuing crowd.”

“That would present no difficulties,” said Lemoine. “He would be a
rescuer in advance of the rest, that was all.”

“Do you really think this Arsène Lupin fellow is actually among the
household now?” asked Bill, his eyes sparkling.

“Why not?” said Lemoine. “He could pass perfectly as a servant. For all
we may know, he may be Boris Anchoukoff, the trusted servant of the
late Prince Michael.”

“He is an odd-looking bloke,” agreed Bill.

But Anthony was smiling.

“That’s hardly worthy of you, M. Lemoine,” he said gently.

The Frenchman smiled too.

“You’ve taken him on as your valet now, haven’t you, Mr. Cade?” asked
Superintendent Battle.

“Battle, I take off my hat to you. You know everything. But just as a
matter of detail, he’s taken me on, not I him.”

“Why was that, I wonder, Mr. Cade?”

“I don’t know,” said Anthony lightly. “It’s a curious taste, but
perhaps he may have liked my face. Or he may think I murdered his
master and wish to establish himself in a handy position for executing
revenge upon me.”

He rose and went over to the windows, pulling the curtains.

“Daylight,” he said, with a slight yawn. “There won’t be any more
excitements now.”

Lemoine rose also.

“I will leave you,” he said. “We shall perhaps meet again later in the
day.”

With a graceful bow to Virginia, he stepped out of the window.

“Bed,” said Virginia, yawning. “It’s all been very exciting. Come on,
Bill, go to bed like a good little boy. The breakfast table will see us
not, I fear.”

Anthony stayed at the window looking after the retreating form of M.
Lemoine.

“You wouldn’t think it,” said Battle behind him, “but that’s supposed
to be the cleverest detective in France.”

“I don’t know that I wouldn’t,” said Anthony thoughtfully. “I rather
think I would.”

“Well,” said Battle, “he was right about the excitements of this night
being over. By the way, do you remember my telling you about that man
they’d found shot near Staines?”

“Yes. Why?”

“Nothing. They’ve identified him, that’s all. It seems he was called
Giuseppe Manelli. He was a waiter at the Blitz in London. Curious,
isn’t it?”




20

Battle and Anthony Confer


Anthony said nothing. He continued to stare out of the window.
Superintendent Battle looked for some time at his motionless back.

“Well, good night, sir,” he said at last, and moved to the door.

Anthony stirred.

“Wait a minute, Battle.”

The superintendent halted obediently. Anthony left the window. He drew
out a cigarette from his case and lighted it. Then, between two puffs
of smoke, he said:

“You seem very interested in this business at Staines?”

“I wouldn’t go as far as that, sir. It’s unusual, that’s all.”

“Do you think the man was shot where he was found, or do you think
he was killed elsewhere and the body brought to that particular spot
afterwards?”

“I think he was shot somewhere else, and the body brought there in a
car.”

“I think so too,” said Anthony.

Something in the emphasis of his tone made the detective look up
sharply.

“Any ideas of your own, sir? Do you know who brought him there?”

“Yes,” said Anthony. “I did.”

He was a little annoyed at the absolutely unruffled calm preserved by
the other.

“I must say you take these shocks very well, Battle,” he remarked.

“‘Never display emotion.’ That was a rule that was given to me once,
and I’ve found it very useful.”

“You live up to it, certainly,” said Anthony. “I can’t say I’ve ever
seen you ruffled. Well, do you want to hear the whole story?”

“If you please, Mr. Cade.”

Anthony pulled up two of the chairs, both men sat down, and Anthony
recounted the events of the preceding Thursday night.

Battle listened immovably. There was a far-off twinkle in his eyes as
Anthony finished.

“You know, sir,” he said, “You’ll get into trouble one of these days.”

“Then, for the second time, I’m not to be taken into custody?”

“We always like to give a man plenty of rope,” said Superintendent
Battle.

“Very delicately put,” said Anthony. “Without unduly stressing the end
of the proverb.”

“What I can’t quite make out, sir,” said Battle, “is why you decided to
come across with this now?”

“It’s rather difficult to explain,” said Anthony. “You see, Battle,
I’ve come to have really a very high opinion of your abilities. When
the moment comes, you’re always there. Look at to-night. And it
occurred to me that, in withholding this knowledge of mine, I was
seriously cramping your style. You deserve to have access to all the
facts. I’ve done what I could, and up to now I’ve made a mess of
things. Until to-night, I couldn’t speak for Mrs. Revel’s sake. But now
that those letters have been definitely proved to have nothing whatever
to do with her, any idea of her complicity becomes absurd. Perhaps
I advised her badly in the first place, but it struck me that her
statement of having paid this man money to suppress the letters, simply
as a whim, might take a bit of believing.”

“It might, by a jury,” agreed Battle. “Juries never have any
imagination.”

“But you accept it quite easily?” said Anthony, looking curiously at
him.

“Well, you see, Mr. Cade, most of my work has lain amongst these
people. What they call the upper classes, I mean. You see, the majority
of people are always wondering what the neighbours will think. But
tramps and aristocrats don’t—they just do the first thing that comes
into their heads, and they don’t bother to think what anyone thinks
of them. I’m not meaning just the idle rich, the people who give big
parties, and so on, I mean those that have had it born and bred in
them for generations that nobody else’s opinion counts but their own.
I’ve always found the upper classes the same—fearless, truthful and
sometimes extraordinarily foolish.”

“This is a very interesting lecture, Battle. I suppose you’ll be
writing your Reminiscences one of these days. They ought to be worth
reading too.”

The detective acknowledged the suggestion with a smile, but said
nothing.

“I’d rather like to ask you one question,” continued Anthony. “Did you
connect me at all with the Staines affair? I fancied, from your manner,
that you did.”

“Quite right. I had a hunch that way. But nothing definite to go upon.
Your manner was very good, if I may say so, Mr. Cade. You never overdid
the carelessness.”

“I’m glad of that,” said Anthony. “I’ve a feeling that ever since I met
you you’ve been laying little traps for me. On the whole I’ve managed
to avoid falling into them, but the strain has been acute.”

Battle smiled grimly.

“That’s how you get a crook in the end, sir. Keep him on the run, to
and fro, turning and twisting. Sooner or later, his nerve goes, and
you’ve got him.”

“You’re a cheerful fellow, Battle. When will you get me, I wonder?”

“Plenty of rope, sir,” quoted the superintendent, “plenty of rope.”

“In the meantime,” said Anthony, “I am still the amateur assistant?”

“That’s it, Mr. Cade.”

“Watson to your Sherlock, in fact?”

“Detective stories are mostly bunkum,” said Battle unemotionally. “But
they amuse people,” he added, as an afterthought. “And they’re useful
sometimes.”

“In what way?” asked Anthony curiously.

“They encourage the universal idea that the police are stupid. When we
get an amateur crime, such as a murder, that’s very useful indeed.”

Anthony looked at him for some minutes in silence. Battle sat quite
still, blinking now and then, with no expression whatsoever on his
square placid face. Presently he rose.

“Not much good going to bed now,” he observed. “As soon as he’s up, I
want to have a few words with his lordship. Anyone who wants to leave
the house can do so now. At the same time I should be much obliged to
his lordship if he’ll extend an informal invitation to his guests to
stay on. You’ll accept it, sir, if you please, and Mrs. Revel also.”

“Have you ever found the revolver?” asked Anthony suddenly.

“You mean the one Prince Michael was shot with? No, I haven’t. Yet
it must be in the house or grounds. I’ll take a hint from you, Mr.
Cade, and send some boys up bird’s-nesting. If I could get hold of the
revolver, we might get forward a bit. That, and the bundle of letters.
You say that a letter with the heading, Chimneys, was amongst them?
Depend upon it that was the last one written. The instructions for
finding the diamond are written in code in that letter.”

“What’s your theory of the killing of Giuseppe?” asked Anthony.

“I should say he was a regular thief, and that he was got hold of,
either by King Victor or by the Comrades of the Red Hand, and employed
by them. I shouldn’t wonder at all if the Comrades and King Victor
aren’t working together. The organization has plenty of money and
power, but it isn’t very strong in brains. Giuseppe’s task was to steal
the Memoirs—they couldn’t have known that you had the letters—it’s a
very odd coincidence that you should have, by the way.”

“I know,” said Anthony. “It’s amazing when you come to think of it.”

“Giuseppe gets hold of the letters instead. Is at first vastly
chagrined. Then sees the cutting from the paper and has the brilliant
idea of turning them to account on his own by blackmailing the lady. He
has, of course, no idea of their real significance. The Comrades find
out what he is doing, believe that he is deliberately double crossing
them, and decree his death. They’re very fond of executing traitors.
It has a picturesque element which seems to appeal to them. What I
can’t quite make out is the revolver with ‘Virginia’ engraved upon it.
There’s too much finesse about that for the Comrades. As a rule, they
enjoy plastering their Red Hand sign about—in order to strike terror
into other would-be traitors. No, it looks to me as though King Victor
had stepped in there. But what his motive was, I don’t know. It looks
like a very deliberate attempt to saddle Mrs. Revel with the murder,
and, on the surface, there doesn’t seem any particular point in that.”

“I had a theory,” said Anthony. “But it didn’t work out according to
plan.”

He told Battle of Virginia’s recognition of Michael. Battle nodded his
head.

“Oh, yes, no doubt as to his identity. By the way, that old Baron has a
very high opinion of you. He speaks of you in most enthusiastic terms.”

“That’s very kind of him,” said Anthony. “Especially as I’ve given him
full warning that I mean to do my utmost to get hold of the missing
Memoirs before Wednesday next.”

“You’ll have a job to do that,” said Battle.

“Y—es. You think so? I suppose King Victor and Co. have got the
letters.”

Battle nodded.

“Pinched them off Giuseppe that day in Pont Street. Prettily planned
piece of work, that. Yes, they’ve got ’em all right, and they’ve
decoded them, and they know where to look.”

Both men were on the point of passing out of the room.

“In here?” said Anthony, jerking his head back.

“Exactly, in here. But they haven’t found the prize yet, and they’re
going to run a pretty risk trying to get it.”

“I suppose,” said Anthony, “that you’ve got a plan in that subtle head
of yours?”

Battle returned no answer. He looked particularly stolid and
unintelligent. Then, very slowly, he winked.

“Want my help?” asked Anthony.

“I do. And I shall want some one else’s.”

“Who is that?”

“Mrs. Revel’s. You may not have noticed it, Mr. Cade, but she’s a lady
who has a particularly beguiling way with her.”

“I’ve noticed it all right,” said Anthony.

He glanced at his watch.

“I’m inclined to agree with you about bed, Battle. A dip in the lake
and a hearty breakfast will be far more to the point.”

He ran lightly upstairs to his bedroom. Whistling to himself, he
discarded his evening clothes, and picked up a dressing-gown and a bath
towel.

Then suddenly he stopped dead in front of the dressing-table, staring
at the object that reposed demurely in front of the looking-glass.

For a moment he could not believe his eyes. He took it up, examined it
closely. Yes, there was no mistake.

It was the bundle of letters signed Virginia Revel. They were intact.
Not one was missing.

Anthony dropped into a chair, the letters in his hand.

“My brain must be cracking,” he murmured. “I can’t understand a quarter
of what is going on in this house. Why should the letters reappear like
a damned conjuring trick? Who put them on my dressing-table? Why?”

And to all these very pertinent questions he could find no satisfactory
reply.




21

Mr. Isaacstein’s Suit-case


At ten o’clock that morning, Lord Caterham and his daughter were
breakfasting. Bundle was looking very thoughtful.

“Father,” she said at last.

Lord Caterham, absorbed in _The Times_, did not reply.

“Father,” said Bundle again, more sharply.

Lord Caterham, torn from his interested perusal of forthcoming sales of
rare books, looked up absent-mindedly.

“Eh?” he said. “Did you speak?”

“Yes. Who is it who’s had breakfast?”

She nodded towards a place that had evidently been occupied. The rest
were all expectant.

“Oh, what’s-his-name.”

“Fat Iky?”

Bundle and her father had enough sympathy between them to comprehend
each other’s somewhat misleading observations.

“That’s it.”

“Did I see you talking to the detective this morning before breakfast?”

Lord Caterham sighed.

“Yes, he buttonholed me in the hall. I do think the hours before
breakfast should be sacred. I shall have to go abroad. The strain on my
nerves——”

Bundle interrupted unceremoniously.

“What did he say?”

“Said every one who wanted to could clear out.”

“Well,” said Bundle, “that’s all right. That’s what you’ve been
wanting.”

“I know. But he didn’t leave it at that. He went on to say that
nevertheless he wanted me to ask every one to stay on.”

“I don’t understand,” said Bundle, wrinkling her nose.

“So confusing and contradictory,” complained Lord Caterham. “And before
breakfast too.”

“What did you say?”

“Oh, I agreed, of course. It’s never any good arguing with these
people. Especially before breakfast,” continued Lord Caterham,
reverting to his principal grievance.

“Who have you asked so far?”

“Cade. He was up very early this morning. He’s going to stop on. I
don’t mind that. I can’t quite make the fellow out; but I like him—I
like him very much.”

“So does Virginia,” said Bundle, drawing a pattern on the table with
her fork.

“Eh?”

“And so do I. But that doesn’t seem to matter.”

“And I asked Isaacstein,” continued Lord Caterham.

“Well?”

“But fortunately he’s got to go back to town. Don’t forget to order the
car for the 10.40, by the way.”

“All right.”

“Now if I can only get rid of Fish too,” continued Lord Caterham, his
spirits rising.

“I thought you liked talking to him about your mouldy old books.”

“So I do, so I do. So I did, rather. But it gets monotonous when
one finds that one is always doing all the talking. Fish is very
interested, but he never volunteers any statements of his own.”

“It’s better than doing all the listening,” said Bundle. “Like one does
with George Lomax.”

Lord Caterham shuddered at the remembrance.

“George is all very well on platforms,” said Bundle. “I’ve clapped
him myself, though of course I know all the time that he’s talking
balderdash. And anyway I’m a Socialist——”

“I know, my dear, I know,” said Lord Caterham hastily.

“It’s all right,” said Bundle. “I’m not going to bring politics into
the house. That’s what George does—public speaking in private life. It
ought to be abolished by Act of Parliament.”

“Quite so,” said Lord Caterham.

“What about Virginia?” asked Bundle. “Is she to be asked to stop on?”

“Battle said everybody.”

“Says he firmly! Have you asked her to be my stepma yet?”

“I don’t think it would be any good,” said Lord Caterham mournfully.
“Although she did call me a darling last night. But that’s the worst of
these attractive young women with affectionate dispositions. They’ll
say anything, and they mean absolutely nothing by it.”

“No,” agreed Bundle. “It would have been much more hopeful if she’d
thrown a boot at you or tried to bite you.”

“You modern young people seem to have such unpleasant ideas about
love-making,” said Lord Caterham plaintively.

“It comes from reading _The Sheik_,” said Bundle. “Desert love. Throw
her about, etc.”

“What is _The Sheik_?” asked Lord Caterham simply. “Is it a poem?”

Bundle looked at him with commiserating pity. Then she rose and kissed
the top of his head.

“Dear old Daddy,” she remarked, and sprang lightly out of the window.

Lord Caterham went back to the Sale Rooms.

He jumped when addressed suddenly by Mr. Hiram Fish, who had made his
usual noiseless entry.

“Good morning, Lord Caterham.”

“Oh, good morning,” said Lord Caterham. “Good morning. Nice day.”

“The weather is delightful,” said Mr. Fish.

He helped himself to coffee. By way of food, he took a piece of dry
toast.

“Do I hear correctly that the embargo is removed?” he asked after a
minute or two. “That we are all free to depart?”

“Yes—er—yes,” said Lord Caterham. “As a matter of fact, I hoped, I
mean that I shall be delighted”—his conscience drove him on—“only too
delighted if you will stay on for a little.”

“Why, Lord Caterham——”

“It’s been a beastly visit, I know,” Lord Caterham hurried on. “Too
bad. Shan’t blame you for wanting to run away.”

“You misjudge me, Lord Caterham. The associations have been painful,
no one could deny that point. But the English country life, as lived
in the mansions of the great, has a powerful attraction for me. I am
interested in the study of those conditions. It is a thing we lack
completely in America. I shall be only too delighted to accept your
vurry kind invitation and stay on.”

“Oh, well,” said Lord Caterham, “that’s that. Absolutely delighted, my
dear fellow, absolutely delighted.”

Spurring himself on to a false geniality of manner, Lord Caterham
murmured something about having to see his bailiff and escaped from the
room.

In the hall, he saw Virginia just descending the staircase.

“Shall I take you into breakfast?” asked Lord Caterham tenderly.

“I’ve had it in bed, thank you. I was frightfully sleepy this morning.”

She yawned.

“Had a bad night, perhaps?”

“Not exactly a bad night. From one point of view decidedly a good
night. Oh, Lord Caterham”—she slipped her hand inside his arm and
gave it a squeeze—“I _am_ enjoying myself. You were a darling to ask
me down.”

“You’ll stop on for a bit, then, won’t you? Battle is lifting the—the
embargo, but I want you to stay particularly. So does Bundle.”

“Of course I’ll stay. It’s sweet of you to ask me.”

“Ah!” said Lord Caterham.

He sighed.

“What is your secret sorrow?” asked Virginia. “Has anyone bitten you?”

“That’s just it,” said Lord Caterham mournfully.

Virginia looked puzzled.

“You don’t feel, by any chance, that you want to throw a boot at me?
No, I can see you don’t. Oh, well, it’s of no consequence.”

Lord Caterham drifted sadly away, and Virginia passed out through a
side door into the garden.

She stood there for a moment, breathing in the crisp October air which
was infinitely refreshing to one in her slightly jaded state.

She started a little to find Superintendent Battle at her elbow. The
man seemed to have an extraordinary knack of appearing out of space
without the least warning.

“Good morning, Mrs. Revel. Not too tired, I hope?”

Virginia shook her head.

“It was a most exciting night,” she said. “Well worth the loss of a
little sleep. The only thing is, to-day seems a little dull after it.”

“There’s a nice shady place down under that cedar tree,” remarked the
superintendent. “Shall I take a chair down to it for you?”

“If you think it’s the best thing for me to do,” said Virginia solemnly.

“You’re very quick, Mrs. Revel. Yes, it’s quite true, I do want a word
with you.”

He picked up a long wicker chair and carried it down the lawn. Virginia
followed him with a cushion under her arm.

“Very dangerous place, that terrace,” remarked the detective. “That is,
if you want to have a private conversation.”

“I’m getting excited again, Superintendent Battle.”

“Oh, it’s nothing important.” He took out a big watch and glanced at
it. “Half-past ten. I’m starting for Wyvvern Abbey in ten minutes to
report to Mr. Lomax. Plenty of time. I only wanted to know if you could
tell me a little more about Mr. Cade.”

“About Mr. Cade?”

Virginia was startled.

“Yes, where you first met him, and how long you’ve known him and so
forth.”

Battle’s manner was easy and pleasant enough. He even refrained from
looking at her, and the fact that he did so made her vaguely uneasy.

“It’s more difficult than you think,” she said at last. “He did me a
great service once——”

Battle interrupted her.

“Before you go any further, Mrs. Revel, I’d just like to say something.
Last night, after you and Mr. Eversleigh had gone to bed, Mr. Cade told
me all about the letters and the man who was killed in your house.”

“He did?” gasped Virginia.

“Yes, and very wisely too. It clears up a lot of misunderstanding.
There’s only one thing he didn’t tell me—how long he had known you.
Now I’ve a little idea of my own about that. You shall tell me if I’m
right or wrong. I think that the day he came to your house in Pont
Street was the first time you had ever seen him. Ah! I see I’m right.
It was so.”

Virginia said nothing. For the first time she felt afraid of this
stolid man with the expressionless face. She understood what Anthony
had meant when he said there were no flies on Superintendent Battle.

“Has he ever told you anything about his life?” the detective
continued. “Before he was in South Africa, I mean. Canada? Or before
that, the Sudan? Or about his boyhood?”

Virginia merely shook her head.

“And yet I’d bet he’s got something worth telling. You can’t mistake
the face of a man who’s led a life of daring and adventure. He could
tell you some interesting tales if he cared to.”

“If you want to know about his past life, why don’t you cable to that
friend of his, Mr. McGrath?” Virginia asked.

“Oh, we have. But it seems he’s up country somewhere. Still, there’s no
doubt Mr. Cade was in Bulawayo when he said he was. But I wondered what
he’d been doing before he came to South Africa. He’d only had that job
with Castle’s about a month.” He took out his watch again. “I must be
off. The car will be waiting.”

Virginia watched him retreat to the house. But she did not move from
her chair. She hoped that Anthony might appear and join her. Instead
came Bill Eversleigh, with a prodigious yawn.

“Thank God, I’ve got a chance to speak to you at last, Virginia,” he
complained.

“Well, speak to me very gently, Bill darling, or I shall burst into
tears.”

“Has some one been bullying you?”

“Not exactly bullying me. Getting inside my mind and turning it inside
out. I feel as though I’d been jumped on by an elephant.”

“Not Battle?”

“Yes, Battle. He’s a terrible man really.”

“Well, never mind Battle. I say, Virginia, I do love you so awfully——”

“Not this morning, Bill. I’m not strong enough. Anyway, I’ve always
told you the best people don’t propose before lunch.”

“Good Lord,” said Bill. “I could propose to you before breakfast.”

Virginia shuddered.

“Bill, be sensible and intelligent for a minute. I want to ask your
advice.”

“If you’d once make up your mind to it, and say you’d marry me, you’d
feel miles better, I’m sure. Happier, you know, and more settled down.”

“Listen to me, Bill. Proposing to me is your _idée fixe_. All men
propose when they’re bored and can’t think of anything to say. Remember
my age and my widowed state, and go and make love to a pure young girl.”

“My darling Virginia—Oh, blast! here’s that French idiot bearing down
on us.”

It was indeed M. Lemoine, black-bearded and correct of demeanour as
ever.

“Good morning, madame. You are not fatigued, I trust?”

“Not in the least.”

“That is excellent. Good morning, Mr. Eversleigh.”

“How would it be if we promenaded ourselves a little, the three of us?”
suggested the Frenchman.

“How about it, Bill?” said Virginia.

“Oh, all right,” said the unwilling young gentleman by her side.

He heaved himself up from the grass, and the three of them walked
slowly along. Virginia between the two men. She was sensible at once of
a strange undercurrent of excitement in the Frenchman, though she had
no clue as to what caused it.

Soon, with her usual skill, she was putting him at his ease, asking him
questions, listening to his answers, and gradually drawing him out.
Presently he was telling them anecdotes of the famous King Victor. He
talked well, albeit with a certain bitterness, as he described the
various ways in which the detective bureau had been outwitted.

But all the time, despite the real absorption of Lemoine in his own
narrative, Virginia had a feeling that he had some other object in
view. Moreover, she judged that Lemoine, under cover of his story, was
deliberately striking out his own course across the park. They were
not just strolling idly. He was deliberately guiding them in a certain
direction.

Suddenly, he broke off his story and looked round. They were
standing just where the drive intersected the park before turning an
abrupt corner by a clump of trees. Lemoine was staring at a vehicle
approaching them from the direction of the house.

Virginia’s eyes followed his.

“It’s the luggage cart,” she said, “taking Isaacstein’s luggage and his
valet to the station.”

“Is that so?” said Lemoine. He glanced down at his own watch and
started. “A thousand pardons. I have been longer here than I
meant—such charming company. Is it possible, do you think, that I
might have a lift to the village?”

He stepped out on to the drive, and signalled with his arm. The luggage
cart stopped, and after a word or two of explanation Lemoine climbed in
behind. He raised his hat politely to Virginia, and drove off.

The other two stood and watched the cart disappearing with puzzled
expressions. Just as the cart swung round the bend, a suit-case fell
off into the drive. The cart went on.

“Come on,” said Virginia to Bill. “We’re going to see something
interesting. That suit-case was thrown out.”

“Nobody’s noticed it,” said Bill.

They ran down the drive towards the fallen piece of luggage. Just as
they reached it, Lemoine came round the corner of the bend on foot. He
was hot from walking fast.

“I was obliged to descend,” he said pleasantly. “I found that I had
left something behind.”

“This?” said Bill, indicating the suit-case.

It was a handsome case of heavy pigskin, with the initials H. I. on it.

“What a pity!” said Lemoine gently. “It must have fallen out. Shall we
lift it from the road?”

Without waiting for a reply, he picked up the suit-case, and carried it
over to the belt of trees. He stooped over it, something flashed in his
hand, and the lock slipped back.

He spoke, and his voice was totally different, quick and commanding.

“The car will be here in a minute,” he said. “Is it in sight?”

Virginia looked back towards the house.

“No.”

“Good.”

With deft fingers he tossed the things out of the suit-case.
Gold-topped bottle, silk pyjamas, a variety of socks. Suddenly his
whole figure stiffened. He caught up what appeared to be a bundle of
silk underwear, and unrolled it rapidly.

A slight exclamation broke from Bill. In the centre of the bundle was a
heavy revolver.

“I hear the horn,” said Virginia.

Like lightning, Lemoine repacked the suit-case. The revolver he wrapped
in a silk handkerchief of his own, and slipped into his pocket. He
snapped the locks of the suit-case, and turned quickly to Bill.

“Take it. Madame will be with you. Stop the car, and explain that it
fell off the luggage cart. Do not mention me.”

Bill stepped quickly down to the drive just as the big Lanchester
limousine with Isaacstein inside it came round the corner. The
chauffeur slowed down, and Bill swung the suit-case up to him.

“Fell off the luggage cart,” he explained. “We happened to see it.”

He caught a momentary glimpse of a startled yellow face as the
financier stared at him, and then the car swept on again.

They went back to Lemoine. He was standing with the revolver in his
hand, and a look of gloating satisfaction in his face.

“A long shot,” he said. “A very long shot. But it came off.”




22

The Red Signal


Superintendent Battle was standing in the library at Wyvvern Abbey.

George Lomax, seated before a desk overflowing with papers, was
frowning portentously.

Superintendent Battle had opened proceedings by making a brief and
business-like report. Since then, the conversation had lain almost
entirely with George, and Battle had contented himself with making
brief and usually monosyllabic replies to the other’s questions.

On the desk, in front of George, was the packet of letters Anthony had
found on his dressing-table.

“I can’t understand it at all,” said George irritably, as he picked up
the packet. “They’re in code, you say?”

“Just so, Mr. Lomax.”

“And where does he say he found them—on his dressing-table?”

Battle repeated, word for word, Anthony Cade’s account of how he had
come to regain possession of the letters.

“And he brought them at once to you? That was quite proper—quite
proper. But who could have placed them in his room?”

Battle shook his head.

“That’s the sort of thing you ought to know,” complained George. “It
sounds to me very fishy—very fishy indeed. What do we know about this
man Cade anyway? He appears in a most mysterious manner—under highly
suspicious circumstances—and we know nothing whatever about him. I
may say that I, personally, don’t care for his manner at all. You’ve
made inquiries about him, I suppose?”

Superintendent Battle permitted himself a patient smile.

“We wired at once to South Africa, and his story has been confirmed on
all points. He was in Bulawayo with Mr. McGrath at the time he stated.
Previous to their meeting, he was employed by Messrs. Castle, the
Tourist Agents.”

“Just what I should have expected,” said George. “He has the kind of
cheap assurance that succeeds in a certain type of employment. But
about these letters—steps must be taken at once—at once——”

The great man puffed himself out and swelled importantly.

Superintendent Battle opened his mouth, but George forestalled him.

“There must be no delay. These letters must be decoded without any loss
of time. Let me see, who is the man? There is a man—connected with
the British Museum. Knows all there is to know about ciphers. Ran the
department for us during the War. Where is Miss Oscar? She will know.
Name something like Win—Win——”

“Professor Wynward,” said Battle.

“Exactly. I remember perfectly now. He must be wired to, immediately.”

“I have done so, Mr. Lomax, an hour ago. He will arrive by the 12.10.”

“Oh, very good, very good. Thank Heaven, something is off my mind.
I shall have to be in town to-day. You can get along without me, I
suppose?”

“I think so, sir.”

“Well, do your best, Battle, do your best. I am terribly rushed just at
present.”

“Just so, sir.”

“By the way, why did not Mr. Eversleigh come over with you?”

“He was still asleep, sir. We’ve been up all night, as I told you.”

“Oh, quite so. I am frequently up nearly the whole night myself. To do
the work of thirty-six hours in twenty-four, that is my constant task!
Send Mr. Eversleigh over at once when you get back, will you, Battle?”

“I will give him your message, sir.”

“Thank you, Battle. I realize perfectly that you had to repose a
certain amount of confidence in him. But do you think it was strictly
necessary to take my cousin, Mrs. Revel, into your confidence also?”

“In view of the name signed to those letters, I do, Mr. Lomax.”

“An amazing piece of effrontery,” murmured George, his brow darkened
as he looked at the bundle of letters. “I remember the late King of
Herzoslovakia. A charming fellow, but weak—deplorably weak. A tool in
the hands of an unscrupulous woman. Have you any theory as to how these
letters came to be restored to Mr. Cade?”

“It’s my opinion,” said Battle, “that if people can’t get a thing one
way—they try another.”

“I don’t quite follow you,” said George.

“This crook, this King Victor, he’s well aware by now that the Council
Chamber is watched. So he’ll let us have the letters, and let us do
the decoding, and let us find the hiding-place. And then—trouble! But
Lemoine and I between us will attend to that.”

“You’ve got a plan, eh?”

“I wouldn’t go so far as to say I’ve got a plan. But I’ve got an idea.
It’s a very useful thing sometimes, an idea.”

Thereupon Superintendent Battle took his departure.

He had no intention of taking George any further into his confidence.

On the way back, he passed Anthony on the road and stopped.

“Going to give me a lift back to the house?” asked Anthony. “That’s
good.”

“Where have you been, Mr. Cade?”

“Down to the station to inquire about trains.”

Battle raised his eyebrows.

“Thinking of leaving us again?” he inquired.

“Not just at present,” laughed Anthony. “By the way what’s upset
Isaacstein? He arrived in the car just as I left, and he looked as
though something had given him a nasty jolt.”

“Mr. Isaacstein?”

“Yes.”

“I can’t say, I’m sure. I fancy it would take a good deal to jolt him.”

“So do I,” agreed Anthony. “He’s quite one of the strong silent yellow
men of finance.”

Suddenly Battle leant forward and touched the chauffeur on the shoulder.

“Stop, will you? And wait for me here.”

He jumped out of the car, much to Anthony’s surprise. But in a minute
or two, the latter perceived M. Lemoine advancing to meet the English
detective, and gathered that it was a signal from him which had
attracted Battle’s attention.

There was a rapid colloquy between them, and then the superintendent
returned to the car and jumped in again, biding the chauffeur drive on.

His expression had completely changed.

“They’ve found the revolver,” he said suddenly and curtly.

“What?”

Anthony gazed at him in great surprise.

“Where?”

“In Isaacstein’s suit-case.”

“Oh, impossible!”

“Nothing’s impossible,” said Battle. “I ought to have remembered that.”

He sat perfectly still, tapping his knee with his hand.

“Who found it?”

Battle jerked his head over his shoulder.

“Lemoine. Clever chap. They think no end of him at the Sûreté.”

“But doesn’t this upset all your ideas?”

“No,” said Superintendent Battle very slowly. “I can’t say it does. It
was a bit of a surprise, I admit, at first. But it fits in very well
with one idea of mine.”

“Which is?”

But the superintendent branched off on to a totally different subject.

“I wonder if you’d mind finding Mr. Eversleigh for me, sir? There’s a
message for him from Mr. Lomax. He’s to go over to the Abbey at once.”

“All right,” said Anthony. The car had just drawn up at the great door.
“He’s probably in bed still.”

“I think not,” said the detective. “If you’ll look, you’ll see him
walking under the trees with Mrs. Revel.”

“Wonderful eyes you have, haven’t you, Battle?” said Anthony as he
departed on his errand.

He delivered the message to Bill, who was duly disgusted.

“Damn it all,” grumbled Bill to himself, as he strode off to the house,
“why can’t Codders sometimes leave me alone? And why can’t these
blasted Colonials stay in their Colonies? What do they want to come
over here for, and pick out all the best girls? I’m fed to the teeth
with everything.”

“Have you heard about the revolver?” asked Virginia breathlessly, as
Bill left them.

“Battle told me. Rather staggering, isn’t it? Isaacstein was in a
frightful state yesterday to get away, but I thought it was just
nerves. He’s about the one person I’d have pitched upon as being above
suspicion. Can you see any motive for his wanting Prince Michael out of
the way?”

“It certainly doesn’t fit in,” agreed Virginia thoughtfully.

“Nothing fits in anywhere,” said Anthony discontentedly. “I rather
fancied myself as an amateur detective to begin with, and so far all
I’ve done is to clear the character of the French governess at vast
trouble and some little expense.”

“Is that what you went to France for?” inquired Virginia.

“Yes, I went to Dinard and had an interview with the Comtesse de
Breteuil, awfully pleased with my own cleverness, and fully expecting
to be told that no such person as Mademoiselle Brun had ever been
heard of. Instead of which I was given to understand that the lady in
question had been the mainstay of the household for the last seven
years. So, unless the Comtesse is also a crook, that ingenious theory
of mine falls to the ground.”

Virginia shook her head.

“Madame de Breteuil is quite above suspicion. I know her quite well,
and I fancy I must have come across Mademoiselle at the chateau. I
certainly know her face quite well—in that vague way one does know
governesses and companions and people one sits opposite to in trains.
It’s awful, but I never really look at them properly. Do you?”

“Only if they’re exceptionally beautiful,” admitted Anthony.

“Well, in this case——” she broke off. “What’s the matter?”

Anthony was staring at a figure which detached itself from the clump of
trees and stood there rigidly at attention. It was the Herzoslovakian,
Boris.

“Excuse me,” said Anthony to Virginia, “I must just speak to my dog a
minute.”

He went across to where Boris was standing.

“What’s the matter? What do you want?”

“Master,” said Boris, bowing.

“Yes, that’s all very well, but you mustn’t keep following me about
like this. It looks odd.”

Without a word, Boris produced a soiled scrap of paper, evidently torn
from a letter, and handed it to Anthony.

“What’s this?” said Anthony.

There was an address scrawled on the paper, nothing else.

“He dropped it,” said Boris. “I bring it to the Master.”

“Who dropped it?”

“The foreign gentleman.”

“But why bring it to me?”

Boris looked at him reproachfully.

“Well, anyway, go away now,” said Anthony. “I’m busy.”

Boris saluted, turned sharply on his heel, and marched away. Anthony
rejoined Virginia, thrusting the piece of paper into his pocket.

“What did he want?” she asked curiously. “And why do you call him your
dog?”

“Because he acts like one,” said Anthony, answering the last question
first. “He must have been a retriever in his last incarnation, I think.
He’s just brought me a piece of a letter which he says the foreign
gentleman dropped. I suppose he means Lemoine.”

“I suppose so,” acquiesced Virginia.

“He’s always following me round,” continued Anthony. “Just like a dog.
Says next to nothing. Just looks at me with his big round eyes. I can’t
make him out.”

“Perhaps he meant Isaacstein,” suggested Virginia. “Isaacstein looks
foreign enough, Heaven knows.”

“Isaacstein,” muttered Anthony impatiently. “Where the devil does he
come in?”

“Are you ever sorry that you’ve mixed yourself up in all this?” asked
Virginia suddenly.

“Sorry? Good Lord, no. I love it. I’ve spent most of my life looking
for trouble, you know. Perhaps, this time, I’ve got a little more than
I bargained for.”

“But you’re well out of the wood now,” said Virginia, a little
surprised by the unusual gravity of his tone.

“Not quite.”

They strolled on for a minute or two in silence.

“There are some people,” said Anthony, breaking the silence, “who
don’t conform to the signals. An ordinary well-regulated locomotive
slows down or pulls up when it sees the red light hoisted against it.
Perhaps I was born colour blind. When I see the red signal—I can’t
help forging ahead. And in the end, you know, that spells disaster.
Bound to. And quite right really. That sort of thing is bad for traffic
generally.”

He still spoke very seriously.

“I suppose,” said Virginia, “that you have taken a good many risks in
your life?”

“Pretty nearly every one there is—except marriage.”

“That’s rather cynical.”

“It wasn’t meant to be. Marriage, the kind of marriage I mean, would be
the biggest adventure of the lot.”

“I like that,” said Virginia, flushing eagerly.

“There’s only one kind of woman I’d want to marry—the kind who is
worlds removed from my type of life. What would we do about it? Is she
to lead my life, or am I to lead hers?”

“If she loved you——”

“Sentimentality, Mrs. Revel. You know it is. Love isn’t a drug that
you take to blind you to your surroundings—you can make it that, yes,
but it’s a pity—love can be a lot more than that. What do you think
the King and his beggar maid thought of married life after they’d been
married a year or two? Didn’t she regret her rags and her bare feet
and her care-free life? You bet she did. Would it have been any good
renouncing his Crown for her sake? Not a bit of good, either. He’d have
made a damned bad beggar, I’m sure. And no woman respects a man when
he’s doing a thing thoroughly badly.”

“Have you fallen in love with a beggar maid, Mr. Cade?” inquired
Virginia softly.

“It’s the other way about with me, but the principle’s the same.”

“And there’s no way out?” asked Virginia.

“There’s always a way out,” said Anthony gloomily. “I’ve a theory that
one can always get anything one wants if one will pay the price. And
do you know what the price is, nine times out of ten? Compromise. A
beastly thing, compromise, but it steals upon you as you near middle
age. It’s stealing upon me now. To get the woman I want I’d—I’d even
take up regular work.”

Virginia laughed.

“I was brought up to a trade, you know,” continued Anthony.

“And you abandoned it?”

“Yes.”

“Why?”

“A matter of principle.”

“Oh!”

“You’re a very unusual woman,” said Anthony suddenly, turning and
looking at her.

“Why?”

“You can refrain from asking questions.”

“You mean that I haven’t asked you what your trade was?”

“Just that.”

Again they walked on in silence. They were nearing the house now,
passing close by the scented sweetness of the rose garden.

“You understand well enough, I dare say,” said Anthony, breaking the
silence. “You know when a man’s in love with you. I don’t suppose you
care a hang for me—or for anyone else—but, by God, I’d like to make
you care.”

“Do you think you could?” asked Virginia, in a low voice.

“Probably not, but I’d have a damned good try.”

“Are you sorry you ever met me?” she said suddenly.

“Lord no. It’s the red signal again. When I first saw you—that day
in Pont Street, I knew I was up against something that was going to
hurt like fun. Your face did that to me—just your face. There’s magic
in you from head to foot—some women are like that, but I’ve never
known a woman who had so much of it as you have. You’ll marry some
one respectable and prosperous, I suppose, and I shall return to my
disreputable life, but I’ll kiss you once before I go—I swear I will.”

“You can’t do it now,” said Virginia softly. “Superintendent Battle is
watching us out of the library window.”

Anthony looked at her.

“You’re rather a devil, Virginia,” he said dispassionately. “But rather
a dear too.”

Then he waved his hand airily to Superintendent Battle.

“Caught any criminals this morning, Battle?”

“Not as yet, Mr. Cade.”

“That sounds hopeful.”

Battle, with an agility surprising in so stolid a man, vaulted out of
the library window and joined them on the terrace.

“I’ve got Professor Wynward down here,” he announced in a whisper.
“Just this minute arrived. He’s decoding the letters now. Would you
like to see him at work?”

His tone suggested that of the showman speaking of some pet exhibit.
Receiving a reply in the affirmative, he led them up to the window and
invited them to peep inside.

Seated at a table, the letters spread out in front of him and writing
busily on a big sheet of paper was a small red-haired man of middle
age. He grunted irritably to himself as he wrote, and every now and
then rubbed his nose violently until its hue almost rivalled that of
his hair.

Presently he looked up.

“That you, Battle? What you want me down here to unravel this
tomfoolery for? A child in arms could do it. A baby of two could do it
on its head. Call this thing a cipher? It leaps to the eye, man.”

“I’m glad of that, Professor,” said Battle mildly. “But we’re not all
so clever as you are, you know.”

“It doesn’t need cleverness,” snapped the Professor. “It’s routine
work. Do you want the whole bundle done? It’s a long business, you
know—requires diligent application and close attention, and absolutely
no intelligence. I’ve done the one dated ‘Chimneys’ which you said was
important. I might as well take the rest back to London and hand ’em
over to one of my assistants. I really can’t afford the time myself.
I’ve come away now from a real teaser, and I want to get back to it.”

His eyes glistened a little.

“Very well, Professor,” assented Battle. “I’m sorry we’re such small
fry. I’ll explain to Mr. Lomax. It’s just this one letter that all the
hurry is about. Lord Caterham is expecting you to stay for lunch, I
believe.”

“Never have lunch,” said the Professor. “Bad habit, lunch. A banana
and a water biscuit is all any sane and healthy man should need in the
middle of the day.”

He seized his overcoat, which lay across the back of a chair. Battle
went round to the front of the house, and a few minutes later Anthony
and Virginia heard the sound of a car driving away.

Battle rejoined them, carrying in his hand the half-sheet of paper
which the Professor had given him.

“He’s always like that,” said Battle, referring to the departed
Professor. “In the very deuce of a hurry. Clever man, though. Well,
here’s the kernel of Her Majesty’s letter. Care to have a look at it?”

Virginia stretched out a hand, and Anthony read it over her shoulder.
It had been, he remembered, a long epistle, breathing mingled passion
and despair. The genius of Professor Wynward had transformed it into an
essentially business-like communication.

_Operations carried out successfully, but S. double crossed us. Has
removed stone from hiding-place. Not in his room. I have searched.
Found following memorandum which I think refers to it_: “RICHMOND SEVEN
STRAIGHT EIGHT LEFT THREE RIGHT.”

“S.?” said Anthony. “Stylptitch, of course. Cunning old dog. He changed
the hiding-place.”

“Richmond,” said Virginia thoughtfully. “Is the diamond concealed
somewhere at Richmond, I wonder?”

“It’s a favourite spot for Royalties,” agreed Anthony.

Battle shook his head.

“I still think it’s a reference to something in this house.”

“I know,” cried Virginia suddenly.

Both men turned to look at her.

“The Holbein portrait in the Council Chamber. They were tapping on the
wall just below it. And it’s a portrait of the Earl of Richmond!”

“You’ve got it,” said Battle, and slapped his leg.

He spoke with an animation quite unwonted.

“That’s the starting-point, the picture, and the crooks know no more
than we do what the figures refer to. Those two men in armour stand
directly underneath the picture, and their first idea was that the
diamond was hidden in one of them. The measurements might have been
inches. That failed, and their next idea was a secret passage or
stairway, or a sliding panel. Do you know of any such thing, Mrs.
Revel?”

Virginia shook her head.

“There’s a Priest’s Hole, and at least one secret passage, I know,” she
said. “I believe I’ve been shown them once, but I can’t remember much
about them now. Here’s Bundle, she’ll know.”

Bundle was coming quickly along the terrace towards them.

“I’m taking the Panhard up to town after lunch,” she remarked. “Anyone
want a lift? Wouldn’t you like to come, Mr. Cade? We’ll be back by
dinner-time.”

“No, thanks,” said Anthony. “I’m quite happy and busy down here.”

“The man fears me,” said Bundle. “Either my driving or my fatal
fascination! Which is it?”

“The latter,” said Anthony. “Every time.”

“Bundle, dear,” said Virginia, “is there any secret passage leading out
of the Council Chamber?”

“Rather. But it’s only a mouldy one. Supposed to lead from Chimneys to
Wyvvern Abbey. So it did in the old, old days, but it’s all blocked up
now. You can only get along it for about a hundred yards from this end.
The one upstairs in the White Gallery is ever so much more amusing, and
the Priest’s Hole isn’t half bad.”

“We’re not regarding them from an artistic standpoint,” explained
Virginia. “It’s business. How do you get into the Council Chamber one?”

“Hinged panel. I’ll show you after lunch if you like.”

“Thank you,” said Superintendent Battle. “Shall we say at 2.30?”

Bundle looked at him with lifted eyebrows.

“Crook stuff?” she inquired.

Tredwell appeared on the terrace.

“Luncheon is served, my lady,” he announced.




23

Encounter in the Rose Garden


At 2.30 a little party met together in the Council Chamber: Bundle,
Virginia, Superintendent Battle, M. Lemoine and Anthony Cade.

“No good waiting until we can get hold of Mr. Lomax,” said Battle.
“This is the kind of business one wants to get on with quickly.”

“If you’ve got any idea that Prince Michael was murdered by some one
who got in this way, you’re wrong,” said Bundle. “It can’t be done. The
other end’s blocked completely.”

“There is no question of that, milady,” said Lemoine quickly. “It is
quite a different search that we make.”

“Looking for something, are you?” asked Bundle quickly. “Not the
historic what-not, by any chance?”

Lemoine looked puzzled.

“Explain yourself, Bundle,” said Virginia encouragingly. “You can when
you try.”

“The thingummybob,” said Bundle. “The historic diamond of purple
princes that was pinched in the dark ages before I grew to years of
discretion.”

“Who told you this, Lady Eileen?” asked Battle.

“I’ve always known. One of the footmen told me when I was twelve years
old.”

“A footman,” said Battle. “Lord! I’d like Mr. Lomax to have heard that!”

“Is it one of George’s closely guarded secrets?” asked Bundle. “How
perfectly screaming! I never really thought it was true. George always
was an ass—he must know that servants always know everything.”

She went across to the Holbein portrait, touched a spring concealed
somewhere at the side of it, and immediately, with a creaking noise, a
section of the panelling swung inward, revealing a dark opening.

“Entrez, Messieurs et Mesdames,” said Bundle dramatically. “Walk up,
walk up, dearies. Best show of the season, and only a tanner.”

Both Lemoine and Battle were provided with torches. They entered the
dark aperture first, the others close on their heels.

“Air’s nice and fresh,” remarked Battle. “Must be ventilated somehow.”

He walked on ahead. The floor was of rough uneven stone, but the
walls were bricked. As Bundle had said, the passage extended for a
bare hundred yards. Then it came to an abrupt end with a fallen heap
of masonry. Battle satisfied himself that there was no way of egress
beyond, and then spoke over his shoulder.

“We’ll go back, if you please. I wanted just to spy out the land, so to
speak.”

In a few minutes they were back again at the panelled entrance.

“We’ll start from here,” said Battle. “Seven straight, eight left,
three right. Take the first as paces.”

He paced seven steps carefully, and bending down examined the ground.

“About right, I should fancy. At one time or another, there’s been
a chalk mark made here. Now then, eight left. That’s not paces, the
passage is only wide enough to go Indian file anyway.”

“Say it in bricks,” suggested Anthony.

“Quite right, Mr. Cade. Eight bricks from the bottom or the top on the
left-hand side. Try from the bottom first—it’s easier.”

He counted up eight bricks.

“Now three to the right of that. One, two, three—Hullo—— Hullo,
what’s this?”

“I shall scream in a minute,” said Bundle, “I know I shall. _What_ is
it?”

Superintendent Battle was working at the brick with the point of his
knife. His practised eye had quickly seen that this particular brick
was different from the rest. A minute or two’s work, and he was able to
pull it right out. Behind was a small dark cavity. Battle thrust in his
hand.

Every one waited in breathless expectancy.

Battle drew out his hand again.

He uttered an exclamation of surprise and anger.

The others crowded round and stared uncomprehendingly at the three
articles he held. For a moment it seemed as though their eyes must have
deceived them.

A card of small pearl buttons, a square of coarse knitting and a piece
of paper on which were inscribed a row of capital E’s!

“Well,” said Battle. “I’m—I’m danged! What’s the meaning of this?”

“_Mon Dieu_,” muttered the Frenchman. “_Ça, c’est un peu trop fort!_”

“But what does it mean?” cried Virginia, bewildered.

“Mean?” said Anthony. “There’s only one thing it can mean. The late
Count Stylptitch must have had a sense of humour! This is an example
of that humour. I may say that I don’t consider it particularly funny
myself.”

“Do you mind explaining your meaning a little more clearly, sir?” said
Superintendent Battle.

“Certainly. This was the Count’s little joke. He must have suspected
that his memorandum had been read. When the crooks came to recover the
jewel, they were to find instead this extremely clever conundrum. It’s
the sort of thing you pin on to yourself at Book Teas, when people have
to guess what you are.”

“It has a meaning, then?”

“I should say, undoubtedly. If the Count had meant to be merely
offensive, he would have put a placard with ‘Sold’ on it, or a picture
of a donkey or something crude like that.”

“A bit of knitting, some capital E’s, and a lot of buttons,” muttered
Battle discontentedly.

“_C’est inoui_,” said Lemoine angrily.

“Cipher No. 2,” said Anthony. “I wonder whether Professor Wynward would
be any good at this one?”

“When was this passage last used, milady?” asked the Frenchman of
Bundle.

Bundle reflected.

“I don’t believe anyone’s been into it for over two years. The Priest’s
Hole is the show exhibit for Americans and tourists generally.”

“Curious,” murmured the Frenchman.

“Why curious?”

Lemoine stooped and picked up a small object from the floor.

“Because of this,” he said. “This match has not lain here for two
years—not even for two days.”

Battle looked at the match curiously. It was of pink wood, with a
yellow head.

“Any of you ladies or gentlemen drop this, by any chance?” he asked.

He received a negative all round.

“Well, then,” said Superintendent Battle, “we’ve seen all there is to
see. We might as well get out of here.”

The proposal was assented to by all. The panel had swung to, but Bundle
showed them how it was fastened from the inside. She unlatched it,
swung it noiselessly open, and sprang through the opening, alighting in
the Council Chamber with a resounding thud.

“Damn!” said Lord Caterham, springing up from an arm-chair in which he
appeared to have been taking forty winks.

“Poor old father,” said Bundle. “Did I startle you?”

“I can’t think,” said Lord Caterham, “why nobody nowadays ever sits
still after a meal. It’s a lost art. God knows Chimneys is big enough,
but even here there doesn’t seem to be a single room where I can be
sure of a little peace. Good Lord, how many of you are there? Reminds
me of the Pantomimes I used to go to as a boy when hordes of demons
used to pop up out of trapdoors.”

“Demon No. 7,” said Virginia, approaching him, and patting him on the
head. “Don’t be cross. We’re just exploring secret passages, that’s
all.”

“There seems to be a positive boom in secret passages to-day,” grumbled
Lord Caterham, not yet completely mollified. “I’ve had to show that
fellow Fish round them all this morning.”

“When was that?” asked Battle quickly.

“Just before lunch. It seems he’d heard of the one in here. I showed
him that, and then took him up to the White Gallery, and we finished
up with the Priest’s Hole. But his enthusiasm was waning by that time.
He looked bored to death. But I made him go through with it.” Lord
Caterham chuckled at the remembrance.

Anthony put a hand on Lemoine’s arm.

“Come outside,” he said softly. “I want to speak to you.”

The two men went out together through the window. When they had gone a
sufficient distance from the house, Anthony drew from his pocket the
scrap of paper that Boris had given him that morning.

“Look here,” he said. “Did you drop this?”

Lemoine took it and examined it with some interest.

“No,” he said. “I have never seen it before. Why?”

“Quite sure?”

“Absolutely sure, Monsieur.”

“That’s very odd.”

He repeated to Lemoine what Boris had said. The other listened with
close attention.

“No, I did not drop it. You say he found it in that clump of trees?”

“Well, I assumed so, but he did not actually say so.”

“It is just possible that it might have fluttered out of M.
Isaacstein’s suit-case. Question Boris again.” He handed the paper back
to Anthony. After a minute or two he said: “What exactly do you know of
this man Boris?”

Anthony shrugged his shoulders.

“I understood he was the late Prince Michael’s trusted servant.”

“It may be so, but make it your business to find out. Ask some one who
knows, such as the Baron Lolopretjzyl. Perhaps this man was engaged but
a few weeks ago. For myself, I have believed him honest. But who knows?
King Victor is quite capable of making himself into a trusted servant
at a moment’s notice.”

“Do you really think——”

Lemoine interrupted him.

“I will be quite frank. With me, King Victor is an obsession. I see him
everywhere. At this moment even I ask myself—this man who is talking
to me, this M. Cade, is he, perhaps, King Victor?”

“Good Lord,” said Anthony, “you have got it badly.”

“What do I care for the diamond? For the discovery of the murderer of
Prince Michael? I leave those affairs to my colleague of Scotland Yard
whose business it is. Me, I am in England for one purpose, and one
purpose only, to capture King Victor and to capture him red-handed.
Nothing else matters.”

“Think you’ll do it?” asked Anthony, lighting a cigarette.

“How should I know?” said Lemoine, with sudden despondency.

“H’m!” said Anthony.

They had regained the terrace. Superintendent Battle was standing near
the French window in a wooden attitude.

“Look at poor old Battle,” said Anthony. “Let’s go and cheer him up.”
He paused a minute, and said, “You know, you’re an odd fish in some
ways, M. Lemoine.”

“In what ways, M. Cade?”

“Well,” said Anthony, “in your place, I should have been inclined
to note down that address that I showed you. It may be of no
importance—quite conceivably. On the other hand, it might be very
important indeed.”

Lemoine looked at him for a minute or two steadily. Then, with a slight
smile, he drew back the cuff of his left coat sleeve. Pencilled on the
white shirt-cuff beneath were the words “Hurstmere, Langly Road, Dover.”

“I apologize,” said Anthony. “And I retire worsted.”

He joined Superintendent Battle.

“You look very pensive, Battle,” he remarked.

“I’ve got a lot to think about, Mr. Cade.”

“Yes, I expect you have.”

“Things aren’t dovetailing. They’re not dovetailing at all.”

“Very trying,” sympathized Anthony. “Never mind, Battle, if the worst
comes to the worst, you can always arrest me. You’ve got my guilty
footprints to fall back upon, remember.”

But the superintendent did not smile.

“Got any enemies here that you know of, Mr. Cade?” he asked.

“I’ve an idea that the third footman doesn’t like me,” replied
Anthony lightly. “He does his best to forget to hand me the choicest
vegetables. Why?”

“I’ve been getting anonymous letters,” said Superintendent Battle. “Or
rather an anonymous letter, I should say.”

“About me?”

Without answering Battle took a folded sheet of cheap notepaper from
his pocket, and handed it to Anthony. Scrawled on it in an illiterate
handwriting were the words:

“Look out for Mr. Cade. He isn’t wot he seems.”

Anthony handed it back with a light laugh.

“That’s all? Cheer up, Battle. I’m really a King in disguise, you know.”

He went into the house, whistling lightly as he walked along. But as
he entered his bedroom and shut the door behind him, his face changed.
It grew set and stern. He sat down on the edge of the bed and stared
moodily at the floor.

“Things are getting serious,” said Anthony to himself. “Something must
be done about it. It’s all damned awkward....”

He sat there for a minute or two, then strolled to the window. For a
moment or two he stood looking out aimlessly, and then his eyes became
suddenly focused on a certain spot, and his face lightened.

“Of course,” he said. “The Rose Garden! That’s it! The Rose Garden.”

He hurried downstairs again and out into the garden by a side door. He
approached the Rose Garden by a circuitous route. It had a little gate
at either end. He entered by the far one, and walked up to the sundial
which was on a raised hillock in the exact centre of the garden.

Just as Anthony reached it, he stopped dead and stared at another
occupant of the Rose Garden who seemed equally surprised to see him.

“I didn’t know that you were interested in roses, Mr. Fish,” said
Anthony gently.

“Sir,” said Mr. Fish, “I am considerably interested in roses.”

They looked at each other warily, as antagonists seek to measure their
opponents’ strength.

“So am I,” said Anthony.

“Is that so?”

“In fact, I dote upon roses,” said Anthony airily.

A very slight smile hovered upon Mr. Fish’s lips and at the same time
Anthony also smiled. The tension seemed to relax.

“Look at this beauty now,” said Mr. Fish, stooping to point out a
particularly fine bloom. “Madame Abel Chatenay, I pressoom it to be.
Yes, I am right. This white rose, before the war, was known as Frau
Carl Drusky. They have, I believe, renamed it. Over sensitive, perhaps
but truly patriotic. The La France is always popular. Do you care for
red roses at all, Mr. Cade? A bright scarlet rose now——”

Mr. Fish’s slow, drawling voice was interrupted. Bundle was leaning out
of a first-floor window.

“Care for a spin to town, Mr. Fish? I’m just off.”

“Thank you, Lady Eileen, but I am vurry happy here.”

“Sure you won’t change your mind, Mr. Cade?”

Anthony laughed and shook his head. Bundle disappeared.

“Sleep is more in my line,” said Anthony, with a wide yawn. “A good
after luncheon nap!” He took out a cigarette. “You haven’t got a match,
have you?”

Mr. Fish handed him a match-box. Anthony helped himself, and handed
back the box with a word of thanks.

“Roses,” said Anthony, “are all very well. But I don’t feel
particularly horticultural this afternoon.”

With a disarming smile, he nodded cheerfully.

A thundering noise sounded from just outside the house.

“Pretty powerful engine she’s got in that car of hers,” remarked
Anthony. “There, off she goes.”

They had a view of the car speeding down the long drive.

Anthony yawned again, and strolled towards the house.

He passed in through the door. Once inside, he seemed as though changed
to quicksilver. He raced across the hall, out through one of the
windows on the farther side, and across the park. Bundle, he knew, had
to make a big détour by the lodge gates, and through the village.

He ran desperately. It was a race against time. He reached the park
wall just as he heard the car outside. He swung himself up and dropped
into the road.

“Hi!” cried Anthony.

In her astonishment, Bundle swerved half across the road. She managed
to pull up without accident. Anthony ran after the car, opened the
door, and jumped in beside Bundle.

“I’m coming to London with you,” he said. “I meant to all along.”

“Extraordinary person,” said Bundle. “What’s that you’ve got in your
hand?”

“Only a match,” said Anthony.

He regarded it thoughtfully. It was pink, with a yellow head. He threw
away his unlighted cigarette, and put the match carefully into his
pocket.




24

The House at Dover


“You don’t mind, I suppose,” said Bundle after a minute or two, “if I
drive rather fast? I started later than I meant to do.”

It had seemed to Anthony that they were proceeding at a terrific speed
already, but he soon saw that that was nothing compared to what Bundle
could get out of the Panhard if she tried.

“Some people,” said Bundle, as she slowed down momentarily to pass
through a village, “are terrified of my driving. Poor old father, for
instance. Nothing would induce him to come up with me in this old bus.”

Privately, Anthony thought Lord Caterham was entirely justified.
Driving with Bundle was not a sport to be indulged in by nervous,
middle-aged gentlemen.

“But you don’t seem nervous a bit,” continued Bundle approvingly, as
she swept round a corner on two wheels.

“I’m in pretty good training, you see,” explained Anthony gravely.
“Also,” he added, as an afterthought, “I’m rather in a hurry myself.”

“Shall I speed her up a bit more?” asked Bundle kindly.

“Good Lord, no,” said Anthony hastily. “We’re averaging about fifty as
it is.”

“I’m burning with curiosity to know the reason of this sudden
departure,” said Bundle, after executing a fanfare upon the Klaxon
which must temporarily have deafened the neighbourhood. “But I suppose
I mustn’t ask? You’re not escaping from justice, are you?”

“I’m not quite sure,” said Anthony. “I shall know soon.”

“That Scotland Yard man isn’t as much of a rabbit as I thought,” said
Bundle thoughtfully.

“Battle’s a good man,” agreed Anthony.

“You ought to have been in diplomacy,” remarked Bundle. “You don’t part
with much information, do you?”

“I was under the impression that I babbled.”

“Oh! Boy! You’re not eloping with Mademoiselle Brun, by any chance?”

“Not guilty!” said Anthony with fervour.

There was a pause of some minutes during which Bundle caught up and
passed three other cars. Then she asked suddenly:

“How long have you known Virginia?”

“That’s a difficult question to answer,” said Anthony, with perfect
truth. “I haven’t actually met her very often, and yet I seem to have
known her a long time.”

Bundle nodded.

“Virginia’s got brains,” she remarked abruptly. “She’s always talking
nonsense, but she’s got brains all right. She was frightfully good out
in Herzoslovakia, I believe. If Tim Revel had lived he’d have had a
fine career—and mostly owing to Virginia. She worked for him tooth and
nail. She did everything in the world she could for him—and I know
why, too.”

“Because she cared for him?” Anthony sat looking very straight ahead of
him.

“No, because she didn’t. Don’t you see? She didn’t love him—she never
loved him, and so she did everything on earth she could to make up.
That’s Virginia all over. But don’t you make any mistake about it.
Virginia was never in love with Tim Revel.”

“You seem very positive,” said Anthony, turning to look at her.

Bundle’s little hands were clenched on the steering wheel, and her
chin was stuck out in a determined manner.

“I know a thing or two. I was only a kid at the time of her marriage,
but I heard one or two things, and knowing Virginia I can put them
together easily enough. Tim Revel was bowled over by Virginia—he was
Irish, you know, and most attractive, with a genius for expressing
himself well. Virginia was quite young—eighteen. She couldn’t go
anywhere without seeing Tim in a state of picturesque misery, vowing
he’d shoot himself or take to drink if she didn’t marry him. Girls
believe these things—or used to—we’ve advanced a lot in the last
eight years. Virginia was carried away by the feeling she thought she’d
inspired. She married him—and she was an angel to him always. She
wouldn’t have been half as much of an angel if she’d loved him. There’s
a lot of the devil in Virginia. But I can tell you one thing—she
enjoys her freedom. And anyone will have a hard time persuading her to
give it up.”

“I wonder why you tell me all this?” said Anthony slowly.

“It’s interesting to know about people, isn’t it? Some people, that is.”

“I’ve wanted to know,” he acknowledged.

“And you’d never have heard from Virginia. But you can trust me for an
inside tip from the stables. Virginia’s a darling. Even women like her
because she isn’t a bit of a cat. And anyway,” Bundle ended, somewhat
obscurely, “one must be a sport, mustn’t one?”

“Oh, certainly,” Anthony agreed. But he was still puzzled. He had no
idea what had prompted Bundle to give him so much information unasked.
That he was glad of it, he did not deny.

“Here are the trams,” said Bundle, with a sigh. “Now, I suppose, I
shall have to drive carefully.”

“It might be as well,” agreed Anthony.

His ideas and Bundle’s on the subject of careful driving hardly
coincided. Leaving indignant suburbs behind them, they finally emerged
into Oxford Street.

“Not bad going, eh?” said Bundle, glancing at her wrist watch.

Anthony assented fervently.

“Where do you want to be dropped?”

“Anywhere. Which way are you going?”

“Knightsbridge way.”

“All right, drop me at Hyde Park Corner.”

“Good-bye,” said Bundle, as she drew up at the place indicated. “What
about the return journey?”

“I’ll find my own way back, thanks very much.”

“I _have_ scared him,” remarked Bundle.

“I shouldn’t recommend driving with you as a tonic for nervous old
ladies, but personally I’ve enjoyed it. The last time I was in equal
danger was when I was charged by a herd of wild elephants.”

“I think you’re extremely rude,” remarked Bundle. “We’ve not even had
one bump to-day.”

“I’m sorry if you’ve been holding yourself in on my account,” retorted
Anthony.

“I don’t think men are really very brave,” said Bundle.

“That’s a nasty one,” said Anthony. “I retire, humiliated.” Bundle
nodded and drove on. Anthony hailed a passing taxi. “Victoria Station,”
he said to the driver as he got in.

When he got to Victoria he paid off the taxi and inquired for the next
train to Dover. Unfortunately he had just missed one.

Resigning himself to a wait of something over an hour, Anthony paced up
and down, his brows knit. Once or twice he shook his head impatiently.

The journey to Dover was uneventful. Arrived there, Anthony passed
quickly out of the station, and then, as though suddenly remembering,
he turned back again. There was a slight smile on his lips as he asked
to be directed to Hurstmere, Langly Road.

The road in question was a long one, leading right out of the town.
According to the porter’s instructions, Hurstmere was the last house.
Anthony trudged along steadily. The little pucker had reappeared
between his eyes. Nevertheless there was a new elation in his manner,
as always when danger was near at hand.

Hurstmere was, as the porter had said, the last house in Langly Road.
It stood well back, enclosed in its own grounds, which were ragged and
overgrown. The place, Anthony judged, must have been empty for many
years. A large iron gate swung rustily on its hinges, and the name on
the gatepost was half obliterated.

“A lonely spot,” muttered Anthony to himself, “and a good one to
choose.”

He hesitated a minute or two, glanced quickly up and down the
road—which was quite deserted—and then slipped quietly past the
creaking gate into the overgrown drive. He walked up it a little
way, and then stood listening. He was still some distance from the
house. Not a sound could be heard anywhere. Some fast yellowing leaves
detached themselves from one of the trees overhead and fell with a
soft rustling sound that was almost sinister in the stillness. Anthony
started; then smiled.

“Nerves,” he murmured to himself. “Never knew I had such things before.”

He went on up the drive. Presently, as the drive curved, he slipped
into the shrubbery and so continued his way unseen from the house.
Suddenly he stood still, peering out through the leaves. Some distance
away a dog was barking, but it was a sound nearer at hand that had
attracted Anthony’s attention.

His keen hearing had not been mistaken. A man came rapidly round
the corner of the house, a short square, thickset man, foreign in
appearance. He did not pause but walked steadily on, circling the house
and disappearing again.

Anthony nodded to himself.

“Sentry,” he murmured. “They do the thing quite well.”

As soon as he had passed, Anthony went on, diverging to the left, and
so following in the footsteps of the sentry.

His own footsteps were quite noiseless.

The wall of the house was on his right, and presently he came to where
a broad blur of light fell on the gravelled walk. The sound of several
men talking together was clearly audible.

“My God! what double-dyed idiots,” murmured Anthony to himself. “It
would serve them right to be given a fright.”

He stole up to the window, stooping a little so that he should not be
seen. Presently he lifted his head very carefully to the level of the
sill and looked in.

Half a dozen men were sprawling round a table. Four of them were big
thickset men, with high cheek-bones, and eyes set in Magyar slanting
fashion. The other two were rat-like little men with quick gestures.
The language that was being spoken was French, but the four big men
spoke it with uncertainty and a hoarse guttural intonation.

“The Boss?” growled one of these. “When will he be here?”

One of the smaller men shrugged his shoulders.

“Any time now.”

“About time, too,” growled the first man. “I have never seen him, this
Boss of yours, but, oh, what great and glorious work might we not have
accomplished in these days of idle waiting!”

“Fool,” said the other little man bitingly. “Getting nabbed by the
police is all the great and glorious work you and your precious lot
would have been likely to accomplish. A lot of blundering gorillas?”

“Aha!” roared another big thickset fellow. “You insult the Comrades? I
will soon set the sign of the Red Hand round your throat.”

He half rose, glaring ferociously at the Frenchman, but one of his
companions pulled him back again.

“No quarreling,” he grunted. “We’re to work together. From all I heard
this King Victor doesn’t stand for being disobeyed.”

In the darkness, Anthony heard the footsteps of the sentry coming his
round again, and he drew back behind a bush.

“Who’s that?” said one of the men inside.

“Carlo—going his rounds.”

“Oh! What about the prisoner?”

“He’s all right—coming round pretty fast now. He’s recovered well from
the crack on the head we gave him.”

Anthony moved gently away.

“God! what a lot,” he muttered. “They discuss their affairs with an
open window, and that fool Carlo goes his round with the tread of an
elephant, and the eyes of a bat. And to crown all, the Herzoslovakians
and the French are on the point of coming to blows. King Victor’s
headquarters seem to be in a parlous condition. It would amuse me, it
would amuse me very much, to teach them a lesson.”

He stood irresolute for a minute, smiling to himself.

From somewhere above his head came a stifled groan.

Anthony looked up. The groan came again.

Anthony glanced quickly from left to right. Carlo was not due round
again just yet. He grasped the heavy Virginia creeper and climbed
nimbly till he reached the sill of a window. The window was shut, but
with a tool from his pocket he soon succeeded in forcing up the catch.

He paused a minute to listen, then sprang lightly inside the room.
There was a bed in the far corner and on that bed a man was lying, his
figure barely discernible in the gloom.

Anthony went over to the bed, and flashed his pocket torch on the man’s
face. It was a foreign face, pale and emaciated, and the head was
swathed in heavy bandages.

The man was bound hand and foot. He stared up at Anthony like one dazed.

Anthony bent over him, and as he did so he heard a sound behind him and
swung round, his hand travelling to his coat pocket.

But a sharp command arrested him.

“Hands up, sonny. You didn’t expect to see me here, but I happened to
catch the same train as you at Victoria.”

It was Mr. Hiram Fish who was standing in the doorway. He was smiling
and in his hand was a big blue automatic.




25

Tuesday Night at Chimneys


Lord Caterham, Virginia and Bundle were sitting in the library after
dinner. It was Tuesday evening. Some thirty hours had elapsed since
Anthony’s rather dramatic departure.

For at least the seventh time Bundle repeated Anthony’s parting words,
as spoken at Hyde Park Corner.

“I’ll find my own way back,” repeated Virginia thoughtfully. “That
doesn’t look as though he expected to be away as long as this. And he’s
left all his things here.”

“He didn’t tell you where he was going?”

“No,” said Virginia, looking straight in front of her. “He told me
nothing.”

After this, there was a silence for a minute or two. Lord Caterham was
the first to break it.

“On the whole,” he said, “keeping an hotel has some advantages over
keeping a country house.”

“Meaning——?”

“That little notice they always hang up in your room. Visitors
intending departure must give notice before twelve o’clock.”

Virginia smiled.

“I dare say,” he continued, “that I am old-fashioned and unreasonable.
It’s the fashion, I know, to pop in and out of a house. Same idea as an
hotel—perfect freedom of action, and no bill at the end!”

“You are an old grouser,” said Bundle. “You’ve had Virginia and me.
What more do you want?”

“Nothing more, nothing more,” Lord Caterham assured them hastily.
“That’s not it at all. It’s the principle of the thing. It gives one
such a restless feeling. I’m quite willing to admit that it’s been an
almost ideal twenty-four hours. Peace—perfect peace. No burglaries or
other crimes of violence, no detectives, no Americans. What I complain
of is that I should have enjoyed it all so much more if I’d felt really
secure. As it is, all the time I’ve been saying to myself ‘One or other
of them is bound to turn up in a minute.’ And that spoilt the whole
thing.”

“Well, nobody has turned up,” said Bundle. “We’ve been left severely
alone—neglected, in fact. It’s odd the way Fish disappeared. Didn’t he
say anything?”

“Not a word. Last time I saw him he was pacing up and down the Rose
Garden yesterday afternoon, smoking one of those unpleasant cigars of
his. After that he seems to have just melted into the landscape.”

“Somebody must have kidnapped him,” said Bundle hopefully.

“In another day or two, I expect we shall have Scotland Yard dragging
the lake to find his dead body,” said her father gloomily. “It serves
me right. At my time of life, I ought to have gone quietly abroad and
taken care of my health, and not allowed myself to be drawn into George
Lomax’s wild-cat schemes. I——”

He was interrupted by Tredwell.

“Well,” said Lord Caterham irritably, “what is it?”

“The French detective is here, my lord, and would be glad if you could
spare him a few minutes.”

“What did I tell you?” said Lord Caterham. “I knew it was too good to
last. Depend upon it, they’ve found Fish’s dead body doubled up in the
goldfish pond.”

Tredwell, in a strictly respectful manner, steered him back to the
point of issue.

“Am I to say that you will see him, my lord?”

“Yes, yes. Bring him in here.”

Tredwell departed. He returned a minute or two later announcing in a
lugubrious voice:

“Monsieur Lemoine.”

The Frenchman came in with a quick, light step. His walk, more than his
face, betrayed the fact that he was excited about something.

“Good evening, Lemoine,” said Lord Caterham. “Have a drink, won’t you?”

“I thank you, no.” He bowed punctiliously to the ladies. “At last I
make progress. As things are, I felt that you should be acquainted with
the discoveries—the very grave discoveries that I have made in the
course of the last twenty-four hours.”

“I thought there must be something important going on somewhere,” said
Lord Caterham.

“My lord, yesterday afternoon one of your guests left this house in
a curious manner. From the beginning, I must tell you, I have had my
suspicions. Here is a man who comes from the wilds. Two months ago he
was in South Africa. Before that—where?”

Virginia drew a sharp breath. For a moment the Frenchman’s eyes rested
on her doubtfully. Then he went on:

“Before that—where? None can say. And he is just such a one as
the man I am looking for—gay, audacious, reckless, one who would
dare anything. I send cable after cable, but I can get no word as
to his past life. Ten years ago he was in Canada, yes, but since
then—silence. My suspicions grow stronger. Then I picked up one
day a scrap of paper where he has lately passed along. It bears an
address—the address of a house in Dover. Later, as though by chance,
I drop that same piece of paper. Out of the tail of my eye, I see this
Boris, this Herzoslovakian, pick it up and take it to his master.
All along I have been sure that this Boris is an emissary of the
Comrades of the Red Hand. We know that the Comrades are working in with
King Victor over this affair. If Boris recognized his Chief in Mr.
Anthony Cade, would he not do just what he has done—transferred his
allegiance? Why should he attach himself otherwise to an insignificant
stranger? It was suspicious, I tell you, very suspicious.

“But almost I am disarmed, for Anthony Cade brings this same paper to
me at once and asks me if I have dropped it. As I say, almost I am
disarmed—but not quite! For it may mean that he is innocent, or it may
mean that he is very, very clever. I deny, of course, that it is mine
or that I dropped it. But in the meantime I have set inquiries on foot.
Only to-day I have news. The house at Dover has been precipitately
abandoned, but up till yesterday afternoon it was occupied by a body
of foreigners. Not a doubt but that it was King Victor’s headquarters.
Now see the significance of these points. Yesterday afternoon, Mr. Cade
clears out from here precipitately. Ever since he dropped that paper,
he must know that the game is up. He reaches Dover and immediately the
gang is disbanded. What the next move will be, I do not know. What
is quite certain is that Mr. Anthony Cade will not return here. But
knowing King Victor, as I do, I am certain that he will not abandon
the game without having one more try for the jewel. And that is when I
shall get him!”

Virginia stood up suddenly. She walked across to the mantelpiece and
spoke in a voice that rang cold like steel.

“You are leaving one thing out of account, I think, M. Lemoine,” she
said. “Mr. Cade is not the only guest who disappeared yesterday in a
suspicious manner.”

“You mean, Madame——?”

“That all you have said applies equally well to another person. What
about Mr. Hiram Fish?”

“Oh, Mr. Fish!”

“Yes, Mr. Fish. Did you not tell us that first night that King
Victor had lately come to England from America? So has Mr. Fish come
to England from America. It is true that he brought a letter of
introduction from a very well-known man, but surely that would be a
simple thing for a man like King Victor to manage. He is certainly not
what he pretends to be. Lord Caterham has commented on the fact that
when it is a question of the first editions he is supposed to have
come here to see he is always the listener, never the talker. And there
are several suspicious facts against him. There was a light in his
window the night of the murder. Then take that evening in the Council
Chamber. When I met him on the terrace he was fully dressed. _He_ could
have dropped the paper. You didn’t actually _see_ Mr. Cade do so. Mr.
Cade may have gone to Dover. If he did it was simply to investigate. He
may have been kidnapped there. I say that there is far more suspicion
attaching to Mr. Fish’s actions than to Mr. Cade’s.”

The Frenchman’s voice rang out sharply:

“From your point of view, that well may be, Madame. I do not dispute
it. And I agree that Mr. Fish is not what he seems.”

“Well, then?”

“But that makes no difference. _You see, Madame, Mr. Fish is a
Pinkerton’s man._”

“What?” cried Lord Caterham.

“Yes, Lord Caterham. He came over here to trail King Victor.
Superintendent Battle and I have known this for some time.”

Virginia said nothing. Very slowly she sat down again. With those few
words the structure that she had built up so carefully was scattered in
ruins about her feet.

“You see,” Lemoine was continuing, “we have all known that eventually
King Victor would come to Chimneys. It was the one place we were sure
of catching him.”

Virginia looked up with an odd light in her eyes, and suddenly she
laughed.

“You’ve not caught him yet,” she said.

Lemoine looked at her curiously.

“No, Madame. But I shall.”

“He’s supposed to be rather famous for outwitting people, isn’t he?”

The Frenchman’s face darkened with anger.

“This time, it will be different,” he said between his teeth.

“He’s a very attractive fellow,” said Lord Caterham. “Very attractive.
But surely—why, you said he was an old friend of yours, Virginia?”

“That is why,” said Virginia composedly, “I think M. Lemoine must be
making a mistake.”

And her eyes met the detective’s steadily, but he appeared in no wise
discomfited.

“Time will show, Madame,” he said.

“Do you pretend that it was he who shot Prince Michael?” she asked
presently.

“Certainly.”

But Virginia shook her head.

“Oh, no!” she said. “Oh, no! That is one thing I am quite sure of.
Anthony Cade never killed Prince Michael.”

Lemoine was watching her intently.

“There is a possibility that you are right, Madame,” he said slowly. “A
possibility, that is all. It may have been the Herzoslovakian, Boris,
who exceeded his orders and fired that shot. Who knows, Prince Michael
may have done him some great wrong, and the man sought revenge.”

“He looks a murderous sort of fellow,” agreed Lord Caterham. “The
house-maids, I believe, scream when he passes them in the passages.”

“Well,” said Lemoine. “I must be going now. I felt it was due to you,
my lord, to know exactly how things stand.”

“Very kind of you, I’m sure,” said Lord Caterham. “Quite certain you
won’t have a drink? All right then. Good night.”

“I hate that man with his prim little black beard and his eyeglasses,”
said Bundle, as soon as the door had shut behind him. “I hope Anthony
_does_ snoo him. I’d love to see him dancing with rage. What do you
think about it all, Virginia?”

“I don’t know,” said Virginia. “I’m tired. I shall go up to bed.”

“Not a bad idea,” said Lord Caterham. “It’s half-past eleven.”

As Virginia was crossing the wide hall, she caught sight of a broad
back that seemed familiar to her discreetly vanishing through a side
door.

“Superintendent Battle,” she called imperiously.

The superintendent, for it was indeed he, retraced his steps with a
shade of unwillingness.

“Yes, Mrs. Revel?”

“M. Lemoine has been here. He says—— Tell me, is it true, really
true, that Mr. Fish is an American detective?”

Superintendent Battle nodded.

“That’s right.”

“You have known it all along?”

Again Superintendent Battle nodded.

Virginia turned away towards the staircase.

“I see,” she said. “Thank you.”

Until that minute she had refused to believe.

And now——?

Sitting down before her dressing-table in her own room, she faced the
question squarely. Every word that Anthony had said came back to her
fraught with a new significance.

Was this the “trade” that he had spoken of?

The trade that he had given up. But then——

An unusual sound disturbed the even tenor of her meditations. She
lifted her head with a start. Her little gold clock showed the hour to
be after one. Nearly two hours she had sat here thinking.

Again the sound was repeated. A sharp tap on the window-pane. Virginia
went to the window and opened it. Below on the pathway was a tall
figure which even as she looked stooped for another handful of gravel.

For a moment Virginia’s heart beat faster—then she recognized the
massive strength and square-cut outline of the Herzoslovakian, Boris.

“Yes,” she said in a low tone. “What is it?”

At the moment it did not strike her as strange that Boris should be
throwing gravel at her window at this hour of the night.

“What is it?” she repeated impatiently.

“I come from the Master,” said Boris in a low tone which nevertheless
carried perfectly. “He has sent for you.”

He made the statement in a perfectly matter-of-fact tone.

“Sent for me?”

“Yes, I am to bring you to him. There is a note. I will throw it up to
you.”

Virginia stood back a little, and a slip of paper, weighted with a
stone, fell accurately at her feet. She unfolded it and read:

“_My dear_ (Anthony had written),—_I’m in a tight place, but I mean to
win through. Will you trust me and come to me?_”

For quite two minutes Virginia stood there, immovable, reading those
few words over again and again.

She raised her head, looking round the well-appointed luxury of the
bedroom as though she saw it with new eyes.

Then she leaned out of the window again.

“What am I to do?” she asked.

“The detectives are the other side of the house, outside the Council
Chamber. Come down and out through this side door. I will be there. I
have a car waiting outside in the road.”

Virginia nodded. Quickly she changed her dress for one of fawn tricot,
and pulled on a little fawn leather hat.

Then, smiling a little, she wrote a short note, addressed it to Bundle
and pinned it to the pincushion.

She stole quietly downstairs and undid the bolts of the side door. Just
a moment she paused, then, with a little gallant toss of the head, the
same toss of the head which her ancestors had gone into action in the
Crusades, she passed through.




26

The 13th of October


At ten o’clock on the morning of Wednesday, the 13th of October,
Anthony Cade walked into Harridge’s Hotel and asked for Baron
Lolopretjzyl who was occupying a suite there.

After suitable and imposing delay, Anthony was taken to the suite
in question. The Baron was standing on the hearthrug in a correct
and stiff fashion. Little Captain Andrassy, equally correct as to
demeanour, but with a slightly hostile attitude, was also present.

The usual bows, clicking of heels, and other formal greetings of
etiquette took place. Anthony was, by now, thoroughly conversant with
the routine.

“You will forgive this early call I trust, Baron,” he said cheerfully,
laying down his hat and stick on the table. “As a matter of fact, I
have a little business proposition to make to you.”

“Ha! Is that so?” said the Baron.

Captain Andrassy, who had never overcome his initial distrust of
Anthony, looked suspicious.

“Business,” said Anthony, “is based on the well-known principle of
supply and demand. You want something, the other man has it. The only
thing left to settle is the price.”

The Baron looked at him attentively, but said nothing.

“Between a Herzoslovakian nobleman and an English gentleman the terms
should be easily arranged,” said Anthony rapidly.

He blushed a little as he said it. Such words do not rise easily to
an Englishman’s lips, but he had observed on previous occasions the
enormous effect of such phraseology upon the Baron’s mentality. True
enough, the charm worked.

“That is so,” said the Baron approvingly, nodding his head. “That is
entirely so.”

Even Captain Andrassy appeared to unbend a little, and nodded his head
also.

“Very good,” said Anthony. “I won’t beat about the bush any more——”

“What is that, you say?” interrupted the Baron. “To beat about the
bush? I do not comprehend?”

“A mere figure of speech, Baron. To speak in plain English, _you_ want
the goods, _we_ have them! The ship is all very well, but it lacks a
figurehead. By the ship, I mean the Loyalist party of Herzoslovakia.
At the present minute you lack the principal plank of your political
programme. You are minus a Prince! Now supposing—only supposing, that
I could supply you with a Prince?”

The Baron stared.

“I do not comprehend you in the least,” he declared.

“Sir,” said Captain Andrassy, twirling his moustache fiercely, “you are
insulting!”

“Not at all,” said Anthony. “I’m trying to be helpful. Supply and
demand, you understand. It’s all perfectly fair and square. No
Princes supplied unless genuine—see trademark. If we come to terms,
you’ll find it’s quite all right. I’m offering you the real genuine
article—out of the bottom drawer.”

“Not in the least,” the Baron declared again, “do I comprehend you.”

“It doesn’t really matter,” said Anthony kindly. “I just want you
to get used to the idea. To put it vulgarly, I’ve got something up
my sleeve. Just get hold of this. You want a Prince. Under certain
conditions, I will undertake to supply you with one.”

The Baron and Andrassy stared at him. Anthony took up his hat and stick
again and prepared to depart.

“Just think it over. Now, Baron, there is one thing further. You must
come down to Chimneys this evening—Captain Andrassy also. Several
very curious things are likely to happen there. Shall we make an
appointment? Say in the Council Chamber at nine o’clock? Thank you,
gentlemen, I may rely upon you to be there?”

The Baron took a step forward and looked searchingly in Anthony’s face.

“Mr. Cade,” he said, not without dignity, “it is not, I hope, that you
wish to make fun of me?”

Anthony returned his gaze steadily.

“Baron,” he said, and there was a curious note in his voice, “when this
evening is over, I think you will be the first to admit that there is
more earnest than jest about this business.”

Bowing to both the men, he left the room.

His next call was in the City where he sent in his card to Mr. Herman
Isaacstein.

After some delay, Anthony was received by a pale and exquisitely
dressed underling with an engaging manner, and a military title.

“You wanted to see Mr. Isaacstein, didn’t you?” said the young man.
“I’m afraid he’s most awfully busy this morning—board meetings and all
that sort of thing, you know. Is it anything that I can do?”

“I must see him personally,” said Anthony, and added carelessly. “I’ve
just come up from Chimneys.”

The young man was slightly staggered by the mention of Chimneys.

“Oh!” he said doubtfully. “Well, I’ll see.”

“Tell him it’s important,” said Anthony.

“Message from Lord Caterham?” suggested the young man.

“Something of the kind,” said Anthony, “but it’s imperative that I
should see Mr. Isaacstein at once.”

Two minutes later, Anthony was conducted into a sumptuous inner sanctum
where he was principally impressed by the immense size and roomy
depths of the leather-covered arm-chairs.

Mr. Isaacstein rose to greet him.

“You must forgive my looking you up like this,” said Anthony. “I know
that you’re a busy man, and I’m not going to waste more of your time
than I can help. It’s just a little matter of business that I want to
put before you.”

Isaacstein looked at him attentively for a minute or two out of his
beady black eyes.

“Have a cigar,” he said unexpectedly, holding out an open box.

“Thank you,” said Anthony. “I don’t mind if I do.”

He helped himself.

“It’s about this Herzoslovakian business,” continued Anthony, as he
accepted a match. He noted the momentary flickering of the other’s
steady gaze. “The murder of Prince Michael must have rather upset the
applecart.”

Mr. Isaacstein raised one eyebrow, murmured “Ah?” interrogatively and
transferred his gaze to the ceiling.

“Oil,” said Anthony, thoughtfully surveying the polished surface of the
desk. “Wonderful thing, oil.”

He felt the slight start the financier gave.

“Do you mind coming to the point, Mr. Cade?”

“Not at all. I imagine, Mr. Isaacstein, that if those Oil concessions
are granted to another company you won’t be exactly pleased about it?”

“What’s the proposition?” asked the other, looking straight at him.

“A suitable claimant to the throne, full of pro-British sympathies.”

“Where have you got him?”

“That’s my business.”

Isaacstein acknowledged the retort by a slight smile, his glance had
grown hard and keen.

“The genuine article? I can’t stand for any funny business.”

“The absolute genuine article.”

“Straight?”

“Straight.”

“I’ll take your word for it.”

“You don’t seem to take much convincing?” said Anthony, looking
curiously at him.

Herman Isaacstein smiled.

“I shouldn’t be where I am now if I hadn’t learnt to know whether a man
is speaking the truth or not,” he replied simply. “What terms do you
want?”

“The same loan, on the same conditions, that you offered to Prince
Michael?”

“What about yourself?”

“For the moment, nothing, except that I want you to come down to
Chimneys to-night.”

“No,” said Isaacstein, with some decision. “I can’t do that.”

“Why?”

“Dining out—rather an important dinner.”

“All the same, I’m afraid you’ll have to cut it out—for your own sake.”

“What do you mean?”

Anthony looked at him for a full minute before he said slowly:

“Do you know that they’ve found the revolver, the one Michael was shot
with? Do you know where they found it? In your suit-case.”

“What?”

Isaacstein almost leapt from his chair. His face was frenzied.

“What are you saying? What do you mean?”

“I’ll tell you.”

Very obligingly, Anthony narrated the occurrences in connection with
the finding of the revolver. As he spoke the other’s face assumed a
greyish tinge of absolute terror.

“But it’s false,” he screamed out, as Anthony finished. “I never put it
there. I know nothing about it. It is a plot.”

“Don’t excite yourself,” said Anthony soothingly. “If that’s the case
you’ll easily be able to prove it.”

“Prove it? How can I prove it?”

“If I were you,” said Anthony gently, “I’d come to Chimneys to-night.”

Isaacstein looked at him doubtfully.

“You advise it?”

Anthony leant forward and whispered to him. The financier fell back in
amazement, staring at him.

“You actually mean——”

“Come and see,” said Anthony.




27

The 13th of October (contd.)


The clock in the Council Chamber struck nine.

“Well,” said Lord Caterham, with a deep sigh. “Here they all are, just
like little Bo Peep’s flock, back again and wagging their tails behind
them.”

He looked sadly round the room.

“Organ grinder complete with monkey,” he murmured, fixing the Baron
with his eye. “Nosy Parker of Throgmorton Street——”

“I think you’re rather unkind to the Baron,” protested Bundle, to whom
these confidences were being poured out. “He told me that he considered
you the perfect example of English hospitality amongst the _haute
noblesse_.”

“I daresay,” said Lord Caterham. “He’s always saying things like that.
It makes him most fatiguing to talk to. But I can tell you I’m not
nearly as much of the hospitable English gentleman as I was. As soon
as I can, I shall let Chimneys to an enterprising American, and go and
live in an hotel. There, if anyone worries you, you can just ask for
your bill and go.”

“Cheer up,” said Bundle. “We seem to have lost Mr. Fish for good.”

“I always found him rather amusing,” said Lord Caterham, who was in a
contradictory temper. “It’s that precious young man of yours who has
let me in for this. Why should I have this Board meeting called in my
house? Why doesn’t he rent The Larches or Elmhurst, or some nice villa
residence like that at Streatham, and hold his company meetings there?”

“Wrong atmosphere,” said Bundle.

“No one is going to play any tricks on us, I hope?” said her father
nervously. “I don’t trust that French fellow, Lemoine. The French
police are up to all sorts of dodges. Put India-rubber bands round
your arm, and then reconstruct the crime and make you jump, and it’s
registered on a thermometer. I know that when they call out ‘Who
killed Prince Michael?’ I shall register a hundred and twenty-two, or
something perfectly frightful, and they’ll haul me off to gaol at once.”

The door opened and Tredwell announced:

“Mr. George Lomax. Mr. Eversleigh.”

“Enter Codders, followed by faithful dog,” murmured Bundle.

Bill made a bee-line for her, whilst George greeted Lord Caterham in
the genial manner he assumed for public occasions.

“My dear Caterham,” said George, shaking him by the hand, “I got your
message, and came over, of course.”

“Very good of you, my dear fellow, very good of you. Delighted to see
you.” Lord Caterham’s conscience always drove him on to an excess of
geniality when he was conscious of feeling none. “Not that it was my
message, but that doesn’t matter at all.”

In the meantime, Bill was attacking Bundle in an undertone.

“I say. What’s it all about? What’s this I hear about Virginia bolting
off in the middle of the night? She’s not been kidnapped, has she?”

“Oh, no,” said Bundle. “She left a note pinned to the pincushion in the
orthodox fashion.”

“She’s not gone off with anyone, has she? Not with that Colonial
Johnny? I never liked the fellow and, from all I hear, there seems to
be an idea floating around that he himself is the super crook. But I
don’t quite see how that can be?”

“Why not?”

“Well, this King Victor was a French fellow, and Cade’s English enough.”

“You don’t happen to have heard that King Victor was an accomplished
linguist, and, moreover, was half Irish?”

“Oh, Lord! Then that’s why he’s made himself scarce, is it?”

“I don’t know about his making himself scarce. He disappeared the day
before yesterday, as you know. But this morning we got a wire from him,
saying he would be down here at 9 P.M. to-night, and suggesting that
Codders should be asked over. All these other people have turned up as
well—asked by Mr. Cade.”

“It is a gathering,” said Bill, looking round. “One French detective
by window, one English ditto by fireplace. Strong foreign element. The
Stars and Stripes don’t seem to be represented?”

Bundle shook her head.

“Mr. Fish has disappeared into the blue. Virginia’s not here either.
But every one else is assembled, and I have a feeling in my bones,
Bill, that we are drawing very near to the moment when somebody says
‘James, the footman,’ and everything is revealed. We’re only waiting
now for Anthony Cade to arrive.”

“He’ll never show up,” said Bill.

“Then why call this company meeting, as Father calls it?”

“Ah, there’s some deep idea behind that. Depend upon it. Wants us all
here while he’s somewhere else—you know the sort of thing.”

“You don’t think he’ll come, then?”

“No fear. Run his head into the lion’s mouth? Why, the room’s bristling
with detectives and high officials.”

“You don’t know much about King Victor, if you think that would deter
him. By all accounts, it’s the kind of situation he loves above all,
and he always manages to come out on top.”

Mr. Eversleigh shook his head doubtfully.

“That would take some doing—with the dice loaded against him. He’ll
never——”

The door opened again and Tredwell announced:

“Mr. Cade.”

Anthony came straight across to his host.

“Lord Caterham,” he said, “I’m giving you a frightful lot of trouble,
and I’m awfully sorry about it. But I really do think that to-night
will see the clearing up of the mystery.”

Lord Caterham looked mollified. He had always had a secret liking for
Anthony.

“No trouble at all,” he said heartily.

“It’s very kind of you,” said Anthony. “We’re all here, I see. Then I
can get on with the good work.”

“I don’t understand,” said George Lomax weightily. “I don’t understand
in the least. This is all very irregular. Mr. Cade has no standing—no
standing whatever. The position is a very difficult and delicate one. I
am strongly of the opinion——”

George’s flood of eloquence was arrested. Moving unobtrusively to the
great man’s side, Superintendent Battle whispered a few words in his
ear. George looked perplexed and baffled.

“Very well, if you say so,” he remarked grudgingly. Then added in a
louder tone, “I’m sure we are all willing to listen to what Mr. Cade
has to say.”

Anthony ignored the palpable condescension of the other’s tone.

“It’s just a little idea of mine, that’s all,” he said cheerfully.
“Probably all of you know that we got hold of a certain message in
cipher the other day. There was a reference to Richmond, and some
numbers.” He paused. “Well, we had a shot at solving it—and we failed.
Now in the late Count Stylptitch’s Memoirs (which I happen to have
read) there is a reference to a certain dinner—a ‘Flower’ dinner
which every one attended wearing a badge representing a flower. The
Count himself wore the exact duplicate of that curious device we found
in the cavity in the secret passage. It represented a Rose. If you
remember, it was all _rows_ of things—buttons, letter E’s, and finally
rows of knitting. Now, gentlemen, what is there in this house that
is arranged in rows? Books, isn’t that so? Add to that, that in the
catalogue of Lord Caterham’s library there is a book called _The Life
of the Earl of Richmond_, and I think you will get a very fair idea
of the hiding-place. Starting at the volume in question, and using
the numbers to denote shelves and books, I think you will find that
the—er—object of our search is concealed in a dummy book, or in a
cavity behind a particular book.”

Anthony looked round modestly, obviously waiting for applause.

“Upon my word, that’s very ingenious,” said Lord Caterham.

“Quite ingenious,” admitted George condescendingly. “But it remains to
be seen——”

Anthony laughed.

“The proof of the pudding’s in the eating—eh? Well, I’ll soon settle
that for you.” He sprang to his feet. “I’ll go to the library——”

He got no further. M. Lemoine moved forward from the window.

“Just one moment, Mr. Cade. You permit, Lord Caterham?”

He went to the writing-table and hurriedly scribbled a few lines.
He sealed them up in an envelope, and then rang the bell. Tredwell
appeared in answer to it. Lemoine handed him the note.

“See that that is delivered at once, if you please.”

“Very good, sir,” said Tredwell.

With his usual dignified tread he withdrew.

Anthony, who had been standing, irresolute, sat down again.

“What’s the big idea, Lemoine?” he asked gently.

There was a sudden sense of strain in the atmosphere.

“If the jewel is where you say it is—well, it has been there for over
seven years—a quarter of an hour more does not matter.”

“Go on,” said Anthony. “That wasn’t all you wanted to say?”

“No, it was not. At this juncture, it is—unwise to permit any one
person to leave the room. Especially if that person has rather
questionable antecedents.”

Anthony raised his eyebrows, and lighted a cigarette.

“I suppose a vagabond life is not very respectable,” he mused.

“Two months ago, Mr. Cade, you were in South Africa. That is admitted.
Where were you before that?”

Anthony leaned back in his chair, idly blowing smoke rings.

“Canada. Wild North West.”

“Are you sure you were not in prison? A French prison?”

Automatically, Superintendent Battle moved a step nearer the door, as
if to cut off a retreat that way, but Anthony showed no signs of doing
anything dramatic.

Instead, he stared at the French detective, and then burst out laughing.

“My poor Lemoine. It is a monomania with you! You do indeed see King
Victor everywhere. So you fancy that I am that interesting gentleman?”

“Do you deny it?”

Anthony brushed a fleck of ash from his coat sleeve.

“I never deny anything that amuses me,” he said lightly. “But the
accusation is really too ridiculous.”

“Ah! you think so?” The Frenchman leant forward. His face was twitching
painfully, and yet he seemed perplexed and baffled—as though something
in Anthony’s manner puzzled him. “What if I tell you, Monsieur, that
this time—this time—I am out to get King Victor, and nothing shall
stop me!”

“Very laudable,” was Anthony’s comment. “You’ve been out to get him
before, though, haven’t you, Lemoine? And he’s got the better of you.
Aren’t you afraid that that may happen again? He’s a slippery fellow,
by all accounts.”

The conversation had developed into a duel between the detective and
Anthony. Every one else in the room was conscious of the tension. It
was a fight to a finish between the Frenchman, painfully in earnest,
and the man who smoked so calmly and whose words seemed to show that he
had not a care in the world.

“If I were you, Lemoine,” continued Anthony, “I should be very, very
careful. Watch your step, and all that sort of thing.”

“This time,” said Lemoine grimly, “there will be no mistake.”

“You seem very sure about it all,” said Anthony. “But there’s such a
thing as evidence, you know.”

Lemoine smiled, and something in his smile seemed to attract Anthony’s
attention. He sat up and stubbed out his cigarette.

“You saw that note I wrote just now?” said the French detective. “It
was to my people at the inn. Yesterday I received from France the
fingerprints and the Bertillon measurements of King Victor—the
so-called Captain O’Neill. I have asked for them to be sent up to me
here. In a few minutes we shall _know_ whether you are the man!”

Anthony stared steadily at him. Then a little smile crept over his face.

“You’re really rather clever, Lemoine. I never thought of that. The
documents will arrive, you will induce me to dip my fingers in the ink,
or something equally unpleasant, you will measure my ears and look for
my distinguishing marks. And if they agree——”

“Well,” said Lemoine, “if they agree—eh?”

Anthony leaned forward in his chair.

“Well, if they do agree,” he said very gently, “what then?”

“What then?” The detective seemed taken aback. “But—I shall have
proved then that you are King Victor!”

But for the first time, a shade of uncertainty crept into his manner.

“That will doubtless be a great satisfaction to you,” said Anthony.
“But I don’t quite see where it’s going to hurt me. I’m not admitting
anything, but supposing, just for the sake of argument, that I was King
Victor—I might be trying to repent, you know.”

“Repent?”

“That’s the idea. Put yourself in King Victor’s place, Lemoine. Use
your imagination. You’ve just come out of prison. You’re getting on
in life. You’ve lost the first fine rapture of the adventurous life.
Say, even, that you meet a beautiful girl. You think of marrying and
settling down somewhere in the country where you can grow vegetable
marrows. You decide from henceforth to lead a blameless life. Put
yourself in King Victor’s place. Can’t you imagine feeling like that?”

“I do not think that I should feel like that,” said Lemoine with a
sardonic smile.

“Perhaps you wouldn’t,” admitted Anthony. “But then you’re not King
Victor, are you? You can’t possibly know what he feels like.”

“But it is nonsense, what you are saying there,” spluttered the
Frenchman.

“Oh, no, it isn’t. Come now, Lemoine, if I’m King Victor, what have you
against me after all? You could never get the necessary evidence in
the old, old days, remember. I’ve served my sentence, and that’s all
there is to it. I suppose you could arrest me for the French equivalent
of ‘Loitering with intent to commit a felony,’ but that would be poor
satisfaction, wouldn’t it?”

“You forget,” said Lemoine. “America! How about this business of
obtaining money under false pretences, and passing yourself off as
Prince Nicholas Obolovitch?”

“No good, Lemoine,” said Anthony, “I was nowhere near America at the
time. And I can prove that easily enough. If King Victor impersonated
Prince Nicholas in America, then I’m not King Victor. You’re sure he
_was_ impersonated? That it wasn’t the man himself?”

Superintendent Battle suddenly interposed.

“The man was an impostor all right, Mr. Cade.”

“I wouldn’t contradict you, Battle,” said Anthony. “You have such a
habit of being always right. Are you equally sure that Prince Nicholas
died in the Congo?”

Battle looked at him curiously.

“I wouldn’t swear to that, sir. But it’s generally believed.”

“Careful man. What’s your motto? Plenty of rope, eh? I’ve taken a
leaf out of your book. I’ve given M. Lemoine plenty of rope. I’ve not
denied his accusations. But, all the same, I’m afraid he’s going to be
disappointed. You see I always believe in having something up one’s
sleeve. Anticipating that some little unpleasantness might arise here,
I took the precaution to bring a trump card along with me. It—or
rather he—is upstairs.”

“Upstairs?” said Lord Caterham, very interested.

“Yes, he’s been having rather a trying time of it lately, poor fellow.
Got a nasty bump on the head from some one. I’ve been looking after
him.”

Suddenly the deep voice of Mr. Isaacstein broke in:

“Can we guess who he is?”

“If you like,” said Anthony, “but——”

Lemoine interrupted with sudden ferocity:

“All this is foolery. You think to outwit me yet again. It may be true
what you say—that you were not in America. You are too clever to say
it if it were not true. But there is something else. Murder! Yes,
murder. The murder of Prince Michael. He interfered with you that night
as you were looking for the jewel.”

“Lemoine, have you ever known King Victor to do murder?” Anthony’s
voice rang out sharply. “You know as well—better than I do, that he
has never shed blood.”

“Who else but you could have murdered him?” cried Lemoine. “Tell me
that!”

The last word died on his lips, as a shrill whistle sounded from the
terrace outside. Anthony sprang up, all his assumed nonchalance laid
aside.

“You ask me who murdered Prince Michael?” he cried. “I won’t tell
you—I’ll _show_ you. That whistle was the signal I’ve been waiting
for. The murderer of Prince Michael is in the library now.”

He sprang out through the window, and the others followed him as he led
the way round the terrace, until they came to the library window. He
pushed the window, and it yielded to his touch.

Very softly he held aside the thick velvet curtain, so that they could
look into the room.

Standing by the bookcase was a dark figure, hurriedly pulling out and
replacing volumes, so absorbed in the task that no outside sound was
heeded.

And then, as they stood watching, trying to recognize the figure that
was vaguely silhouetted against the light of the electric torch it
carried, some one sprang past them with a sound like the roar of a wild
beast.

The torch fell to the ground, was extinguished, and the sounds of a
terrific struggle filled the room. Lord Caterham groped his way to the
lights and switched them on.

Two figures were swaying together. And as they looked the end came. The
short sharp crack of a pistol shot, and the smaller figure crumpled up
and fell. The other figure turned and faced them—it was Boris, his
eyes alight with rage.

“She killed my Master,” he growled. “Now she tries to shoot me. I would
have taken the pistol from her and shot her, but it went off in the
struggle. St. Michael directed it. The evil woman is dead.”

“A woman?” cried George Lomax.

They drew nearer. On the floor, the pistol still clasped in her hand,
and an expression of deadly malignity on her face, lay—Mademoiselle
Brun.




28

King Victor


“I suspected her from the first,” explained Anthony. “There was a
light in her room on the night of the murder. Afterwards, I wavered.
I made inquiries about her in Brittany, and came back satisfied that
she was what she represented herself to be. I was a fool. Because the
Comtesse de Breteuil had employed a Mademoiselle Brun and spoke highly
of her, it never occurred to me that the real Mademoiselle Brun might
have been kidnapped on her way to her new post, and that it might be
a substitute taking her place. Instead I shifted my suspicions to Mr.
Fish. It was not until he had followed me to Dover, and we had had a
mutual explanation that I began to see clearly. Once I knew that he was
a Pinkerton’s man, trailing King Victor, my suspicions swung back again
to their original object.

“The thing that worried me most was that Mrs. Revel had definitely
recognized the woman. Then I remembered that it was only _after_
I had mentioned her being Madame de Breteuil’s governess. And all
she had said was that that accounted for the fact that the woman’s
face was familiar to her. Superintendent Battle will tell you that a
deliberate plot was formed to keep Mrs. Revel from coming to Chimneys.
Nothing more nor less than a dead body, in fact. And though the murder
was the work of the Comrades of the Red Hand, punishing supposed
treachery on the part of the victim, the staging of it, and the absence
of the Comrades’ sign manual, pointed to some abler intelligence
directing operations. From the first, I suspected some connection
with Herzoslovakia. Mrs. Revel was the only member of the house party
who had been to the country. I suspected at first that some one was
impersonating Prince Michael, but that proved to be a totally erroneous
idea. When I realized the possibility of Mademoiselle Brun’s being an
impostor, and added to that the fact that her face was familiar to Mrs.
Revel, I began to see daylight. It was evidently very important that
she should not be recognized, and Mrs. Revel was the only person likely
to do so.”

“But who was she?” said Lord Caterham. “Some one Mrs. Revel had known
in Herzoslovakia?”

“I think the Baron might be able to tell us,” said Anthony.

“I?” The Baron stared at him, then down at the motionless figure.

“Look well,” said Anthony. “Don’t be put off by the make-up. She was an
actress once, remember.”

The Baron stared again. Suddenly he started.

“God in heaven,” he breathed, “it is not possible.”

“What is not possible?” asked George. “Who is the lady? You recognize
her, Baron?”

“No, no, it is not possible.” The Baron continued to mutter. “She was
killed. They were both killed. On the steps of the Palace. Her body was
recovered.”

“Mutilated and unrecognizable,” Anthony reminded him. “She managed to
put up a bluff. I think she escaped to America, and has spent a good
many years lying low in deadly terror of the Comrades of the Red Hand.
They promoted the Revolution, remember, and, to use an expressive
phrase, they always had it in for her. Then King Victor was released,
and they planned to recover the diamond together. She was searching
for it that night when she came suddenly upon Prince Michael, and
he recognized her. There was never much fear of her meeting him in
the ordinary way of things. Royal guests don’t come in contact with
governesses, and she could always retire with a convenient _migraine_,
as she did the day the Baron was here.

“However, she met Prince Michael face to face when she least expected
it. Exposure and disgrace stared her in the face. She shot him. It was
she who placed the revolver in Isaacstein’s suit-case, so as to confuse
the trail, and she who returned the letters.”

Lemoine moved forward.

“She was coming down to search for the jewel that night, you say,”
he said. “Might she not have been going to meet her accomplice, King
Victor, who was coming from outside? Eh? What do you say to that?”

Anthony sighed.

“Still at it, my dear Lemoine? How persistent you are! You won’t take
my hint that I’ve got a trump card up my sleeve?”

But George, whose mind worked slowly, now broke in.

“I am still completely at sea. Who was this lady, Baron? You recognize
her, it seems?”

But the Baron drew himself up and stood very straight and stiff.

“You are in error, Mr. Lomax. To my knowledge I have not this lady seen
before. A complete stranger she is to me.”

“But——”

George stared at him—bewildered.

The Baron took him into a corner of the room, and murmured something
into his ear. Anthony watched, with a good deal of enjoyment, George’s
face turning slowly purple, his eyes bulging, and all the incipient
symptoms of apoplexy. A murmur of George’s throaty voice came to him.

“Certainly ... certainly ... by all means ... no need at all ...
complicate situation ... utmost discretion.”

“Ah!” Lemoine hit the table sharply with his hand. “I do not care about
all this! The murder of Prince Michael—that was not my affair. I want
King Victor.”

Anthony shook his head gently.

“I’m sorry for you, Lemoine. You’re really a very able fellow. But, all
the same, you’re going to lose the trick. I’m about to play my trump
card.”

He stepped across the room and rang the bell. Tredwell answered it.

“A gentleman arrived with me this evening, Tredwell.”

“Yes, sir, a foreign gentleman.”

“Quite so. Will you kindly ask him to join us here as soon as possible?”

“Yes, sir.”

Tredwell withdrew.

“Entry of the trump card, the mysterious Monsieur X,” remarked Anthony.
“_Who is he?_ Can anyone guess?”

“Putting two and two together,” said Herman Isaacstein, “what with your
mysterious hints this morning, and your attitude this afternoon, I
should say there was no doubt about it. Somehow or other you’ve managed
to get hold of Prince Nicholas of Herzoslovakia.”

“You think the same, Baron?”

“I do. Unless yet another impostor you have put forward. But that I
will not believe. With me, your dealings most honourable have been.”

“Thank you, Baron. I shan’t forget those words. So you are all agreed?”

His eyes swept round the circle of waiting faces. Only Lemoine did not
respond, but kept his eyes fixed sullenly on the table.

Anthony’s quick ears had caught the sound of footsteps outside in the
hall.

“And yet, you know,” he said with a queer smile, “you’re all wrong!”

He crossed swiftly to the door and flung it open.

A man stood on the threshold—a man with a neat black beard,
eyeglasses, and a foppish appearance slightly marred by a bandage round
the head.

“_Allow me to present you to the real Monsieur Lemoine of the Sûreté._”

There was a rush and a scuffle, and then the nasal tones of Mr. Hiram
Fish rose bland and reassuring from the window.

“No, you don’t, Sonny—not this way. I have been stationed here this
whole evening for the particular purpose of preventing your escape. You
will observe that I have you covered well and good with this gun of
mine. I came over to get you, and I’ve got you—but you sure are some
lad!”




29

Further Explanations


“You owe us an explanation, I think, Mr. Cade,” said Herman Isaacstein,
somewhat later in the evening.

“There’s nothing much to explain,” said Anthony modestly. “I went to
Dover and Fish followed me under the impression that I was King Victor.
We found a mysterious stranger imprisoned there, and as soon as we
heard his story we knew where we were. The same idea again, you see.
The real man kidnapped, and the false one—in this case King Victor
himself—takes his place. But it seems that Battle here always thought
there was something fishy about his French colleague, and wired to
Paris for his fingerprints and other means of identification.”

“Ah!” cried the Baron. “The fingerprints. The Bertillon measurements
that that scoundrel talked about?”

“It was a clever idea,” said Anthony. “I admired it so much that I
felt forced to play up. Besides, my doing so puzzled the false Lemoine
enormously. You see, as soon as I had given the tip about the ‘rows’
and where the jewel really was, he was keen to pass on the news to
his accomplice, and at the same time to keep us all in that room. The
note was really to Mademoiselle Brun. He told Tredwell to deliver it
at once, and Tredwell did so by taking it upstairs to the schoolroom.
Lemoine accused me of being King Victor, by that means creating a
diversion and preventing anyone from leaving the room. By the time all
that had been cleared up and we adjourned to the library to look for
the stone, he flattered himself that the stone would be no longer
there to find!”

George cleared his throat.

“I must say, Mr. Cade,” he said pompously, “that I consider your
action in that matter highly reprehensible. If the slightest hitch had
occurred in your plans, one of our national possessions might have
disappeared beyond the hope of recovery. It was foolhardy, Mr. Cade,
reprehensibly foolhardy.”

“I guess you haven’t tumbled to the little idea, Mr. Lomax,” said the
drawling voice of Mr. Fish. “That historic diamond was never behind the
books in the library.”

“Never?”

“Not on your life.”

“You see,” explained Anthony, “that little device of Count Stylptitch’s
stood for what it had originally stood for—a Rose. When that dawned
upon me on Monday afternoon, I went straight to the Rose Garden. Mr.
Fish had already tumbled to the same idea. If, standing with your back
to the sundial, you take seven paces straight forward, then eight to
the left and three to the right, you come to some bushes of a bright
red rose called Richmond. The house has been ransacked to find the
hiding-place, but nobody has thought of digging in the garden. I
suggest a little digging party to-morrow morning.”

“Then the story about the books in the library—”

“An invention of mine to trap the lady. Mr. Fish kept watch on the
terrace, and whistled when the psychological moment had arrived. I may
say that Mr. Fish and I established martial law at the Dover house, and
prevented the Comrades from communicating with the false Lemoine. He
sent them an order to clear out, and word was conveyed to him that this
had been done. So he went happily ahead with his plans for denouncing
me.”

“Well, well,” said Lord Caterham cheerfully, “everything seems to have
been cleared up most satisfactorily.”

“Everything but one thing,” said Mr. Isaacstein.

“What is that?”

The great financier looked steadily at Anthony.

“What did you get me down here for? Just to assist at a dramatic scene
as an interested onlooker.”

Anthony shook his head.

“No, Mr. Isaacstein. You are a busy man whose time is money. Why did
you come down here originally?”

“To negotiate a loan.”

“With whom?”

“Prince Michael of Herzoslovakia.”

“Exactly. Prince Michael is dead. Are you prepared to offer the same
loan on the same terms to his cousin Nicholas?”

“Can you produce him? I thought he was killed in the Congo?”

“He was killed all right. I killed him. Oh, no, I’m not a murderer.
When I say I killed him, I mean that I spread the report of his death.
I promised you a Prince, Mr. Isaacstein. Will _I_ do?”

“You?”

“Yes, I’m the man. Nicholas Sergius Alexander Ferdinand Obolovitch.
Rather long for the kind of life I proposed to live, so I emerged from
the Congo as plain Anthony Cade.”

Little Captain Andrassy sprang up.

“But this is incredible—incredible,” he spluttered. “Have a care, sir,
what you say.”

“I can give you plenty of proofs,” said Anthony quietly. “I think I
shall be able to convince the Baron here.”

The Baron lifted his hand.

“Your proofs I will examine, yes. But of them for me there is no need.
Your word alone sufficient for me is. Besides, your English mother you
much resemble. All along have I said: ‘This young man on one side or
the other most highly born is’.”

“You have always trusted my word, Baron,” said Anthony. “I can assure
you that in the days to come I shall not forget.”

Then he looked over at Superintendent Battle whose face had remained
perfectly expressionless.

“You can understand,” said Anthony with a smile, “that my position
has been extremely precarious. Of all those in the house I might
be supposed to have the best reason for wishing Michael Obolovitch
out of the way, since I was the next heir to the Throne. I’ve been
extraordinarily afraid of Battle all along. I always felt that he
suspected me, but that he was held up by lack of motive.”

“I never believed for a minute that you’d shot him, sir,” said
Superintendent Battle. “We’ve got a feeling in such matters. But I
knew that you were afraid of something, and you puzzled me. If I’d
known sooner who you really were, I dare say I’d have yielded to the
evidence, and arrested you.”

“I’m glad I managed to keep one guilty secret from you. You wormed
everything else out of me all right. You’re a damned good man at your
job, Battle. I shall always think of Scotland Yard with respect.”

“Most amazing,” muttered George. “Most amazing story I ever heard. I—I
can really hardly believe it. You are quite sure, Baron, that——”

“My dear Mr. Lomax,” said Anthony, with a slight hardness in his tone,
“I have no intention of asking the British Foreign Office to support
my claim without bringing forward the most convincing documentary
evidence. I suggest that we adjourn now, and that you, the Baron, Mr.
Isaacstein and myself discuss the terms of the proposed loan.”

The Baron rose to his feet, and clicked his heels together.

“It will be the proudest moment of my life, sir,” he said solemnly,
“when I see you King of Herzoslovakia.”

“Oh, by the way, Baron,” said Anthony carelessly, slipping his hand
through the other’s arm, “I forgot to tell you. There’s a string tied
to this. I’m married, you know.”

The Baron retreated a step or two. Dismay overspread his countenance.

“Something wrong I knew there would be,” he boomed. “Merciful God in
Heaven! He has married a black woman in Africa!”

“Come, come, it’s not so bad as all that,” said Anthony, laughing.
“She’s white enough—white all through, bless her.”

“Good. A respectable morganatic affair it can be, then.”

“Not a bit of it. She’s to play Queen to my King. It’s no use shaking
your head. She’s fully qualified for the post. She’s the daughter of
an English peer who dates back to the time of the Conqueror. It’s very
fashionable just now for Royalties to marry into the aristocracy—and
she knows something of Herzoslovakia.”

“My God!” cried George Lomax, startled out of his usual careful speech.
“Not—not—Virginia Revel?”

“Yes,” said Anthony. “Virginia Revel.”

“My dear fellow,” cried Lord Caterham, “I mean—sir, I congratulate
you, I do indeed. A delightful creature.”

“Thank you, Lord Caterham,” said Anthony. “She’s all you say and more.”

But Mr. Isaacstein was regarding him curiously.

“You’ll excuse my asking your Highness, but when did this marriage take
place?”

Anthony smiled back at him.

“As a matter of fact,” he said, “I married her this morning.”




30

Anthony Signs on for a New Job


“If you will go on, gentlemen, I will follow you in a minute,” said
Anthony.

He waited whilst the others filed out, and then turned to where
Superintendent Battle was standing apparently absorbed in examining the
panelling.

“Well, Battle? Want to ask me something, don’t you?”

“Well, I do, sir, though I don’t know how you knew I did. But I always
marked you out as being specially quick in the uptake. I take it that
the lady who is dead was the late Queen Varaga?”

“Quite right, Battle. It’ll be hushed up, I hope. You can understand
what I feel about family skeletons.”

“Trust Mr. Lomax for that, sir. No one will ever know. That is, a lot
of people will know, but it won’t get about.”

“Was that what you wanted to ask me about?”

“No, sir—that was only in passing. I was curious to know just what
made you drop your own name—if I’m not taking too much of a liberty?”

“Not a bit. I’ll tell you. I killed myself from the purest motives,
Battle. My mother was English, I’d been educated in England, and I
was far more interested in England than in Herzoslovakia. And I felt
an absolute fool knocking about the world with a comic opera title
tacked on to me. You see, when I was very young, I had democratic
ideas. Believed in the purity of ideals, and the equality of all men. I
especially disbelieved in Kings and Princes.”

“And since then?” asked Battle shrewdly.

“Oh, since then, I’ve travelled and seen the world. There’s damned
little equality going about. Mind you, I still believe in democracy.
But you’ve got to force it on people with a strong hand—ram it down
their throats. Men don’t want to be brothers—they may some day, but
they don’t now. My final belief in the Brotherhood of Man died the day
I arrived in London last week, when I observed the people standing
in a Tube train resolutely refuse to move up and make room for those
who entered. You won’t turn people into angels by appealing to their
better natures just yet awhile—but by judicious force you can coerce
them into behaving more or less decently to one another to go on
with. I still believe in the Brotherhood of Man, but it’s not coming
yet awhile. Say another ten thousand years or so. It’s no good being
impatient. Evolution is a slow process.”

“I’m very interested in these views of yours, sir,” said Battle with a
twinkle. “And if you’ll allow me to say so, I’m sure you’ll make a very
fine King out there.”

“Thank you, Battle,” said Anthony with a sigh.

“You don’t seem very happy about it, sir?”

“Oh, I don’t know. I dare say it will be rather fun. But it’s tying
oneself down to regular work. I’ve always avoided that before.”

“But you consider it your duty, I suppose, sir?”

“Good Lord, no! What an idea. It’s a woman—it’s always a woman,
Battle. I’d do more than be a King for her sake.”

“Quite so, sir.”

“I’ve arranged it so that the Baron and Isaacstein can’t kick. The one
wants a King and the other wants oil. They’ll both get what they want,
and I’ve got—Oh, Lord, Battle, have you ever been in love?”

“I am much attached to Mrs. Battle, sir.”

“Much attached to Mrs.—Oh, you don’t know what I’m talking about! It’s
entirely different!”

“Excuse me, sir, that man of yours is waiting outside the window.”

“Boris? So he is. He’s a wonderful fellow. It’s a mercy that pistol
went off in the struggle and killed the lady. Otherwise Boris would
have wrung her neck as sure as Fate, and then you would have wanted to
hang him. His attachment to the Obolovitch dynasty is remarkable. The
queer thing was that as soon as Michael was dead he attached himself to
me—and yet he couldn’t possibly have known who I really was.”

“Instinct,” said Battle. “Like a dog.”

“Very awkward instinct I thought it at the time. I was afraid it might
give the show away to you. I suppose I’d better see what he wants.”

He went out through the window. Superintendent Battle, left alone,
looked after him for a minute, then apparently addressed the panelling.

“He’ll do,” said Superintendent Battle.

Outside, Boris explained himself.

“Master,” said he, and led the way along the terrace.

Anthony followed him, wondering what was forward.

Presently Boris stopped and pointed with his forefinger. It was
moonlight, and in front of them was a stone seat on which sat two
figures.

“He _is_ a dog,” said Anthony to himself. “And what’s more, a pointer!”

He strode forward. Boris melted into the shadows.

The two figures rose to meet him. One of them was Virginia—the
other——

“Hullo, Joe,” said a well remembered voice. “This is a great girl of
yours.”

“Jimmy McGrath, by all that’s wonderful,” cried Anthony. “How in the
name of fortune did you get here?”

“That trip of mine into the interior went phut. Then some Dagos came
monkeying round. Wanted to buy that manuscript off me. Next thing I as
near as nothing got a knife in the back one night. That made me think
that I’d handed you out a bigger job than I knew. I thought you might
need help, and I came along after you by the very next boat.”

“Wasn’t it splendid of him?” said Virginia. She squeezed Jimmy’s arm.
“Why didn’t you ever tell me how frightfully nice he was? You are,
Jimmy, you’re a perfect dear.”

“You two seem to be getting along all right,” said Anthony.

“Sure thing,” said Jimmy. “I was snooping round for news of you, when
I connected with this dame. She wasn’t at all what I thought she’d
be—some swell haughty Society lady that’d scare the life out of me.”

“He told me all about the letters,” said Virginia. “And I feel almost
ashamed not to have been in real trouble over them when he was such a
knight-errant.”

“If I’d known what you were like,” said Jimmy gallantly, “I’d not have
given him the letters. I’d have brought them to you myself. Say, young
man, is the fun really over? Is there nothing for me to do?”

“By Jove,” said Anthony, “there is! Wait a minute.”

He disappeared into the house. In a minute or two he returned with a
paper package which he cast into Jimmy’s arms.

“Go round to the garage and help yourself to a likely looking car. Beat
it to London and deliver that parcel at 17, Everdean Square. That’s
Mr. Balderson’s private address. In exchange he’ll hand you a thousand
pounds.”

“What? It’s not the Memoirs? I understood that they’d been burnt.”

“What do you take me for?” demanded Anthony. “You don’t think I’d fall
for a story like that, do you? I rang up the publishers at once, found
out that the other was a fake call, and arranged accordingly. I made up
a dummy package as I’d been directed to do. But I put the real package
in the Manager’s safe and handed over the dummy. The Memoirs have never
been out of my possession.”

“Bully for you, my son,” said Jimmy.

“Oh, Anthony,” cried Virginia. “You’re not going to let them be
published?”

“I can’t help myself. I can’t let a pal like Jimmy down. But you
needn’t worry. I’ve had time to wade through them, and I see now why
people always hint that bigwigs don’t write their own reminiscences
but hire some one to do it for them. As a writer, Stylptitch is an
insufferable bore. He proses on about statecraft, and doesn’t go in for
any racy and indiscreet anecdotes. His ruling passion of secrecy held
strong to the end. There’s not a word in the Memoirs from beginning to
end to flutter the susceptibilities of the most difficult politician.
I rang up Balderson to-day, and arranged with him that I’d deliver the
manuscript to-night before midnight. But Jimmy can do his own dirty
work now that’s he’s here.”

“I’m off,” said Jimmy. “I like the idea of that thousand
pounds—especially when I’d made up my mind I was down and out.”

“Half a second,” said Anthony. “I’ve got a confession to make to you,
Virginia. Something that every one else knows, but that I haven’t yet
told you.”

“I don’t mind how many strange women you’ve loved so long as you don’t
tell me about them.”

“Women!” said Anthony, with a virtuous air. “Women indeed? You ask
James here what kind of women I was going about with last time he saw
me.”

“Frumps,” said Jimmy solemnly. “Utter frumps. Not one a day under
forty-five.”

“Thank you, Jimmy,” said Anthony, “you’re a true friend. No, it’s much
worse than that. I’ve deceived you as to my real name.”

“Is it very dreadful?” said Virginia, with interest. “It isn’t
something silly like Pobbles, is it? Fancy being called Mrs. Pobbles.”

“You are always thinking the worst of me.”

“I admit that I did once think you were King Victor, but only for about
a minute and a half.”

“By the way, Jimmy, I’ve got a job for you—gold prospecting in the
rocky fastnesses of Herzoslovakia.”

“Is there gold there?” asked Jimmy eagerly.

“Sure to be,” said Anthony. “It’s a wonderful country.”

“So you’re taking my advice and going there?”

“Yes,” said Anthony. “Your advice was worth more than you knew. Now
for the confession. I wasn’t changed at nurse, or anything romantic
like that, but nevertheless I am really Prince Nicholas Obolovitch of
Herzoslovakia.”

“Oh, Anthony,” cried Virginia. “How perfectly screaming! And I have
married you! What are we going to do about it?”

“We’ll go to Herzoslovakia and pretend to be Kings and Queens. Jimmy
McGrath once said that the average life of a King or Queen out there is
under four years. I hope you don’t mind?”

“Mind?” cried Virginia. “I shall love it!”

“Isn’t she great?” murmured Jimmy.

Then, discreetly, he faded into the night. A few minutes later the
sound of a car was heard.

“Nothing like letting a man do his own dirty work,” said Anthony, with
satisfaction. “Besides, I didn’t know how else to get rid of him. Since
we were married I’ve not had one minute alone with you.”

“We’ll have a lot of fun,” said Virginia. “Teaching the brigands not
to be brigands, and the assassins not to assassinate, and generally
improving the moral tone of the country.”

“I like to hear these pure ideals,” said Anthony. “It makes me feel my
sacrifice has not been in vain.”

“Rot,” said Virginia calmly, “you’ll enjoy being a King. It’s in your
blood, you know. You were brought up to the trade of Royalty, and
you’ve got a natural aptitude for it, just like plumbers have a natural
bent for plumbing.”

“I never think they have,” said Anthony. “But damn it all, don’t let’s
waste time talking about plumbers. Do you know that at this very
minute I’m supposed to be deep in conference with Isaacstein and old
Lollipop? They want to talk about oil. Oil, my God! They can just
await my kingly pleasure. Virginia, do you remember my telling you once
that I’d have a damned good try to make you care for me.”

“I remember,” said Virginia softly. “But Superintendent Battle was
looking out of the window.”

“Well, he isn’t now,” said Anthony.

He caught her suddenly to him, kissing her eyelids, her lips, the green
gold of her hair....

“I do love you so, Virginia,” he whispered. “I do love you so. Do you
love me?”

He looked down at her—sure of the answer.

Her head rested against his shoulder, and very low, in a sweet shaken
voice, she answered:

“Not a bit!”

“You little devil,” cried Anthony, kissing her again. “Now I know for
certain that I shall love you until I die....”




31

Sundry Details


Scene—Chimneys, 11 A.M. Thursday morning.

Johnson, the police constable, with his coat off, digging.

Something in the nature of a funeral feeling seems to be in the air.
The friends and relations stand round the grave that Johnson is digging.

George Lomax has the air of the principal beneficiary under the will
of the deceased. Superintendent Battle, with his immovable face, seems
pleased that the funeral arrangements have gone so nicely. As the
undertaker, it reflects credit upon him. Lord Caterham has that solemn
and shocked look which Englishmen assume when a religious ceremony is
in progress.

Mr. Fish does not fit into the picture so well. He is not sufficiently
grave.

Johnson bends to his task. Suddenly he straightens up. A little stir of
excitement passes round.

“That’ll do, sonny,” says Mr. Fish. “We shall do nicely now.”

One perceives at once that he is really the family physician.

Johnson retires. Mr. Fish, with due solemnity, stoops over the
excavation. The surgeon is about to operate.

He brings out a small canvas package. With much ceremony he hands it
to Superintendent Battle. The latter, in his turn, hands it to George
Lomax. The etiquette of the situation has now been fully complied with.

George Lomax unwraps the package, slits up the oil-silk inside it,
burrows into further wrapping. For a moment he holds something on the
palm of his hand—then quickly shrouds it once more in cotton wool.

He clears his throat.

“At this auspicious minute,” he begins, with the clear delivery of the
practised speaker.

Lord Caterham beats a precipitate retreat. On the terrace he finds his
daughter.

“Bundle, is that car of yours in order?”

“Yes. Why?”

“Then take me up to town in it immediately. I’m going abroad at
once—to-day.”

“But, father——”

“Don’t argue with me, Bundle. George Lomax told me when he arrived this
morning that he was anxious to have a few words with me privately on a
matter of the utmost delicacy. He added that the King of Timbuctoo was
arriving in London shortly. I won’t go through it again, Bundle, do you
hear? Not for fifty George Lomaxes! If Chimneys is so valuable to the
nation, let the nation buy it. Otherwise I shall sell it to a syndicate
and they can turn it into an hotel.”

“Where is Codders now?”

Bundle is rising to the situation.

“At the present minute,” replied Lord Caterham, looking at his watch,
“he is good for at least fifteen minutes about the Empire.”

Another picture.

Mr. Bill Eversleigh, not invited to be present at the graveside
ceremony, at the telephone.

“No, really, I mean it.... I say, don’t be huffy.... Well, you will
have supper to-night anyway?... No, I haven’t. I’ve been kept to it
with my nose at the grindstone. You’ve no idea what Codders is like....
I say, Dolly, you know jolly well what I think about you.... You know
I’ve never cared for anyone but you.... Yes, I’ll come to the show
first. How does the old wheeze go? ‘And the little girl tries, Hooks
and Eyes’....”

Unearthly sounds. Mr. Eversleigh trying to hum the refrain in question.

And now George’s peroration draws to a close.

... “the lasting peace and prosperity of the British Empire!”

“I guess,” said Mr. Hiram Fish _sotto voce_ to himself and the world at
large, “that this has been a great little old week.”

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

   Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

   Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SECRET OF CHIMNEYS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


